I LOVE’S AWAKENING 


Ho, saki, haste, the beaker bring. 

Fill up, and pass it round the ring; 

Love seemed at first an easy thing — 

But ah I the hard awakening. 

So sweet perfume the morning air 
Did lately from her tresses bear. 

Her twisted, musk-diffusing hair — 

What heart’s calamity was there! 

Within life’s caravanserai 
What brief security have I, 

When momently the bell doth cry, 

‘‘Bind on your loads; the hour is nigh!” 



Let wine upon the prayer-mat flow. 

An if the taverner bids so; 

Whose wont is on this road to go 
Its ways and manners well doth know. 



Mark now the mad career of me. 

From wilfulness to infamy ; 

Yet how conceal that mystery 
Whereof men make festivity? 




A mountain sea, moon clouded o’er, 

And nigh the whirlpool’s awful roar — 

How can they know our labour sore 
Who pass light-burthened on the shore? 



Hafiz, if thou wouldst win her grace. 

Be never absent from thy place; 

When thou dost see the well-loved face, 

Be lost at last to time and space. 




2 WHERE IS THE PIOUS DOER? 

Where is the pious doer? and I the estray’d one, where? 

Behold how far the distance, from his safe home to here! 

Dark is the stony desert, trackless and vast and dim. 

Where is hope’s guiding lantern? Where is faith’s star so fair? 

My heart fled from the cloister, and chant of monkish hymn. 
What can avail me sainthood, fasting and punctual prayer? 

What is the truth shall light me to heaven’s strait thoroughfare? 
Whither, O heart, thou hastest? Arrest thee, and beware! 

See what a lone adventure is thine unending quest ! 

Fraught with what deadly danger! Set with what unseen snare! 

Say not, O friend, to Hafez, “Quiet thee now and rest!” 

Calm and content, what are they? Patience and peace, O where? 

ELIZABETH BRIDGES (ELIZABETH DARYUSh) 


84 



3 SWEET MAID 

Sweet maid, if thou would’st charm my sight, 
And bid these arms thy neck infold; 

That rosy cheek, that lily hand, 

Would give thy poet more delight 
Than all Bocara’s vaunted gold, 

Than all the gems of Samarcand. 

Boy, let yon liquid ruby flow. 

And bid thy pensive heart be glad. 

Whatever the frowning 2 ealots say: 

Tell them, their Eden cannot show 
A stream so clear as Rocnabad, 

A bower so sweet as Mosellay. 

O! when these fair perfidious maids, 

Whose eyes our secret haunts infest. 

Their dear destructive charms display; 

Each glance my tender breast invades. 

And robs my wounded soul of rest. 

As Tartars seize their destin’d prey. 

In vain with love our bosoms glow : 

Can all our tears, can all our sighs. 

New lustre to those charms impart? 

Can cheeks, where living roses blow. 

Where nature spreads her richest dyes. 
Require the borrow’d gloss of art? 

Speak not of fate: ah! change the theme. 

And talk of odours, talk of wine, 

Talk of the flowers that round us bloom : 

’Tis all a cloud, ’tis all a dream; 

To love and joy thy thoughts confine. 

Nor hope to pierce the sacred gloom. 

85 



Beauty has such resistless power, 

Than even the chaste Egyptian dame 
Sigh’d for the blooming Hebrew boy : 

For her how fatal was the hour, 

When to the banks of Nilus came 
A youth so lovely and so coy ! 

But ahl sweet maid, my counsel hear 
(Youth should attend when those advise 
Whom long experience renders sage) : 

While music charms the ravish’d ear; 

While sparkling cups delight our eyes, 

Be gay; and scorn the frowns of age. 

What cruel answer have I heard I 
And yet, by heaven, I love thee still: 

Can aught be cruel from thy lip ? 

Yet say, how fell that bitter word 
From lips which streams of sweetness fill. 

Which nought but drops of honey sip? 

Go boldly forth, my simple lay. 

Whose accents flow with artless ease. 

Like orient pearls at random strung: 

Thy notes are sweet, the damsels say; 

But O I far sweeter, if they please 

The nymph for whom these notes are sung. 

SIR WILLIAM JONES 


4 FRIENDLY ZEPHYR 

Go, friendly Zephyr I whisp’ring greet 
Yon gentle fawn with slender feet; 

Say that in quest of her I rove 

The dangerous steeps, the wilds of love. 

86 



Thou merchant who dost sweetness vend 
(Long may kind heav’n thy life defend!) 

Ah, why unfriendly thus forget 
Thy am’rous sweet-billed parroquet? 

Is it, O rose! thy beauty’s pride 
That casts affection far aside, 

Forbidding thee to court the tale 
Of thy fond mate, the nightingale? 

I know not why ’tis rare to see 

The colour of sincerity 

In nymphs who boast majestic grace. 

Dark eyes, and silver-beaming face. 

What tho’ that face be angel fair. 

One fault does all its beauty marr; 

Nor faith, nor constancy adorn 

Thy charms, which else might shame the morn. 

By gentle manners we control 
The wise, the sense-illumin’d soul: 

No idle lure, no glitt’ring bait 
Th’ experienc’d bird will captivate. 

What wonder, Hafez, that thy strain, 

Whose sounds inchant th’ etherial plain. 

Should tempt each graver star to move 
In dances with the star of love? 

J. NOTT 


5 SPRING SONG 

With sullen pace stern winter leaves the plain. 

And blooming spring trips gaily o’er the meads, 
Sweet Philomel now swells her plaintive strain. 
And her lov’d rose his blushing beauties spreads. 

87. 



O Zephyr, whilst you waft your gentle gale. 

Fraught with the fragrance of Arabia’s groves, 

Breathe my soft wishes through yon blooming vale, 
Tell charming Leila how her poet loves! 

O! for one heavenly glance from that dear maid. 

How would my raptur’d heart with joy rebound; 

Down to her feet I’d lowly bend my head. 

And with my eyebrows sweep the hallow’d ground. 

Could those stern fools who steal religion’s mask, 

And rail against the sweet delights of love. 

Fair Leila see, no paradise they’d ask. 

But for her smiles renounce the joys above. 

Trust not in fortune, vain deluded charm! 

Whom wise men shun, and only fools adore. 

Oft, whilst she smiles. Fate sounds the dread alarm. 
Round flies her wheel; you sink to rise no more. 

Ye rich and great, why rear those princely domes? 
Those heaven-aspiring towers why proudly raise? 

Lo! whilst triumphant all around you blooms. 

Death’s aweful angel numbers out your days. 

Sweet tyrant, longer in that flinty breast 
Lock not thy heart, my bosom is its throne ; 

There let the charming flutt’rer gently rest; 

Here feast on joys to vulgar souls unknown. 

But ah! what means that fiercely-rolling eye. 

Those pointed locks which scent the ambient air; 

Now my fond hopes in wild disorder fly. 

Low droops my love, a prey to black despair. 

Those charming brows, arch’d like the heavenly bow. 
Arm not, O gentle maid, with such disdain; 

Drive not a wretch, already sunk full low. 

Hopeless to mourn his never-ceasing pain. 


88 



But to the fair no longer be a slave; 

Drink, Hafez I revel, all your cares unbend. 

And boldly scorn the mean dissembling knave 
Who makes religion every vice defend 1 

J. RICHARDSON 

6 THE HOUSE OF HOPE 

The house of hope is built on sand. 

And life’s foundations rest on air; 

Then come, give wine into my hand, 

That we may make an end of care. 

Let me be slave to that man’s will 
Who ’neath high heaven’s turquoise bowl 
Hath won and winneth freedom still 
From all entanglement of soul; 

Save that the mind entangled be 
With her whose radiant loveliness 
Provoking love and loyalty 
Relieves the mind of all distress. 

Last night as toping I had been 
In tavern, shall I tell to thee 
What message from the world unseen 
A heavenly angel brought to me? 

“Falcon of sovereign renown. 

High-nesting bird of lofty gaze. 

This corner of affliction town 
Befits thee ill, to pass thy days. 

“ Hearest thou not the whistle’s call 
From heaven’s rampart shrills for thee? 

What chanced I cannot guess at all 
This snare should now thy prison be.” 

89 



Heed now the counsel that I give, 

And be it to thy acts applied; 

For these are words I did receive 
From him that was my ancient guide. 

“Be pleased with what the fates bestow. 

Nor let thy brow be furrowed thus; 

The gate to freedom here below 
Stands not ajar to such as us.’’ 

Look not to find fidelity 
Within a world so weakly stayed; 

This ancient crone, ere flouting thee, 

A thousand bridegrooms had betrayed. 

Take not for sign of true intent 
Nor think the rose’s smile sincere; 

Sweet, loving nightingale, lament: 

There is much cause for weeping here. 

What envying of Hafiz’ ease. 

Poor poetaster, dost thou moan? 

To make sweet music, and to please. 

That is a gift of God alone. 

A. j. A. 


7 WILD OF MIEN 

Wild of mien, chanting a love-song, cup in hand, locks disarrayed, 
Cheek beflushed, wine-overcome, vesture awry, breast displayed. 

With a challenge in that eye’s glance, with a love-charm on the lip. 
Came my love, sat by my bedside in the dim midnight shade : 

O’er my ear bending, my love spake in a sad voice and a low, 
“Is it thus, spite of the old years, lover mine, slumber-bewrayed?” 

To the wise comes there a cup, fired of the night, pressed to the lip ; 
An he bow not to the Wine Creed, be he writ Love’s renegade. 

Go thy way, saint of the cell, flout not the dreg-drainer again; 
In the first hour of the world’s birth was the high best on us laid. 


90 



Whatsoe’er potion His hand pours in the bowl, that will we quaff. 
Heady ferment of the Soul-world, or the grape-must unallayed. 
Ah, how oft, e’en as with hafiz, hath the red smile of the vine 
And the curled ringlet on Love’s cheek a repentance unmade! 

WALTER LEAF 


8 RED ROSE 

The rose has flushed red, the bud has burst, 

And drunk with joy is the nightingale — 

Hail, Sufis! lovers of wine, all hail! 

For wine is proclaimed to a world athirst. 

Like a rock your repentance seemed to you; 

Behold the marvel! of what avail 

Was your rock, for a goblet has cleft it in two! 

Bring wine for the king and the slave at the gate 
Alike for all is the banquet spread. 

And drunk and sober are warmed and fed. 

When the feast is done and the night grows late. 

And the second door of the tavern gapes wide, 

The low and the mighty must bow the head 
’Neath the archway of Life, to meet what. . .outside? 
Except thy road through affliction pass. 

None may reach the halting-station of mirth; 

God’s treaty: Am I not Lord of the earth? 

Man sealed with a sigh: Ah yes, alas! 

Nor with Is nor Is Not let thy mind contend; 

Rest assured all perfection of mortal birth 
In the great Is Not at the last shall end. 

For Assaf ’s pomp, and the steeds of the wind. 

And the speech of birds, down the wind have fled. 
And he that was lord of them all is dead; 

Of his mastery nothing remains behind. 

Shoot not thy feathered arrow astray ! 

A bow-shot’s length through the air it has sped. 

And then. . .dropped down in the dusty way. 


91 



But to thee, oh Hafiz, to thee, oh Tongue 
That speaks through the mouth of the slender reed. 
What thanks to thee when thy verses speed 
From lip to lip, and the song thou hast sung? 

GERTRUDE BELL 


9 MY BOSOM GRAC’D 

My bosom grac’d with each gay flow’r, 

I grasp the bowl, my nymph in glee; 

The monarch of the world this hour. 

Is but a slave compar’d to me. 

Intrude not with the taper’s light. 

My social friends, with beaming eyes; 

Trundle around a starry night. 

And lo! my nymph the moon supplies. 

Away, thy sprinkling odours spare. 

Be not officiously thus kind; 

The waving ringlets of my Fair, 

Shed perfume to the fainting wind. 

My ears th’ enlivening notes inspire. 

As lute or harp alternate sound; 

My eyes those ruby lips admire. 

Or catch the glasses sparkling round. 

Then let no moments steal away. 

Without thy mistress and thy wine; 

The spring flowers blossom to decay, 

And youth but glows to own decline. 

THOMAS LAW 


92 



lo ZEPHYR 


Zephyr, should’ st thou chance to rove 
By the mansion of my love. 

From her locks ambrosial bring 
Choicest odours on thy wing. 

Could’st thou waft me from her breast 
Tender sighs to say I’m blest. 

As she lives ! my soul would be 
Sprinkl’d o’er with ecstasy. 

But if Heav’n the boon deny, 

Round her stately footsteps fly, 

With the dust that thence may rise, 

Stop the tears which bathe these eyes. 

Lost, poor mendicant! I roam 
Begging, craving she would come: 

Where shall I thy phantom see. 

Where, dear nymph, a glimpse of thee? 

Like the wind-tost reed my breast 
Fann’d with hope is ne’er at rest. 

Throbbing, longing to excess 
Her fair figure to caress. 

Yes, my charmer, tho’ I see 
Thy heart courts no love with me, 

Not for worlds, could they be mine. 

Would I give a hair of thine. 

Why, O care! shall I in vain 
Strive to shun thy galling chain. 

When these strains still fail to save. 

And make Hafiz more a slave. 

J. H. HINDLEY 


93 



II DAWN 


Thus spoke at dawn the field-bird to the newly wakened rose: 
“Be kind, for many a bloom like you in this meadow grows.” 
The rose laughed: “You will find that we at truth show no 
distress, 

But never did a lover with harsh words his love so press. 

If ruby wine from jewelled cup it is your wish to drink. 

Then pearls and corals pierced with eyelash you must strive to link. 
Love’s savour to his nostrils to entice he ne’er can seek, 

Who on the tavern’s earthy floor has not swept dusty cheek.” 

In Iram’s garden yesternight, when, in the grateful air. 

The breeze of coming day stirred the tress of hyacinth fair, 

I asked : “ Throne of Jamshid, where is thy world-revealing cup ? ” 
It sighed: “That waking fortune deep in sleep lies muffled up.” 
They are not always words of love that from the tongue descend : 
Come, bring me wine, O taverner, and to this talk put end. 

His wit and patience to the waves are cast by Hafiz’ tears. 

What can he do, that may not hide how love his being sears? 

R. LEVY 


12 LAPWING 

Wind from the east, oh Lapwing of the day, 

I send thee to my Lady, though the way 
Is far to Saba, where I bid thee fly; 

Lest in the dust thy tameless wings should lie. 

Broken with grief, I send thee to thy nest. 

Fidelity. 

Or far or near there is no halting-place 
Upon Love’s road — absent, I see thy face. 

And in thine ear my wind-blown greetings sound, 
North winds and east waft them where they are bound. 
Each morn and eve convoys of greeting fair 
I send to thee. 


94 



Unto mine eyes a stranger, thou that art 
A comrade ever-present to my heart. 

What whispered prayers and what full meed of praise 
I send to thee. 

Lest Sorrow’s army waste thy heart’s domain, 

I send my life to bring thee peace again. 

Dear life thy ransom! From thy singers learn 
How one that longs for thee may weep and burn; 
Sonnets and broken words, sweet notes and songs 
I send to thee. 

Give me the cup! a voice rings in mine ears 
Crying : “ Bear patiently the bitter years 1 
For all thine ills, I send thee heavenly grace. 

God the Creator mirrored in thy face 
Thine eyes shall see, God’s image in the glass 
I send to thee. 

“Hafiz, thy praise alone my comrades sing; 

Hasten to us, thou that art sorrowing! 

A robe of honour and a harnessed steed 
I send to thee.” 

GERTRUDE BELL 


13 SECRET DRAUGHT 

The secret draught of wine and love repressed 
Are joys foundationless — then come whate’er 
May come, slave to the grape I stand confessed! 
Unloose, oh friend, the knot of thy heart’s care. 
Despite the warning that the Heavens reveal! 

For all his thought, never astronomer 

That loosed the knot of Fate those Heavens conceal ! 


95 



Not all the changes that thy days unfold 
Shall rouse thy wonder; Time’s revolving sphere 
Over a thousand lives like thine has rolled. 

That cup within thy fingers, dost not hear 
The voices of dead kings speak through the clay 
Kobad, Bahman, Djemshid, their dust is here, 

“ Gently upon me set thy lips 1 ” they say. 

What man can tell where Kaus and Kai have gone? 

Who knows where even now the restless wind 
Scatters the dust of Djem’s imperial throne? 

And where the tulip, following close behind 
The feet of Spring, her scarlet chalice rears, 

There Ferhad for the love of Shirin pined, 

Dyeing the desert red with his heart’s tears. 

Bring, bring the cup ! drink we while yet we may 
To our soul’s ruin the forbidden draught; 

Perhaps a treasure-trove is hid away 
Among those ruins where the wine has laughed 1 — 
Perhaps the tulip knows the fickleness 
Of Fortune’s smile, for on her stalk’s green shaft 
She bears a wine-cup through the wilderness. 

The murmuring stream of Ruknabad, the breeze 
That blows from out Mosalla’s fair pleasaunce. 

Summon me back when I would seek heart’s ease, 
Travelling afar; what though Love’s countenance 
Be turned full harsh and sorrowful on me, 

I care not so that Time’s unfriendly glance 
Still from my Lady’s beauty turned be. 

Like Hafiz, drain the goblet cheerfully 
While minstrels touch the lute and sweetly sing, 

For all that makes thy heart rejoice in thee 
Hangs of Life’s single, slender, silken string. 

GERTRUDE BELL 


96 



14 RECALL 


That day of friendship when we met — Recall; 

Recall those days of fond regret. 

Recall. 

As bitter poison grief my palate sours : 

The sound: ‘‘Be it sweet!’’ at feasts of ours 

Recall. 

My friends, it may be, have forgotten long; 

But I a thousand times that throng 

Recall; 

And now while fettered by misfortune’s chain, 

All those who grateful sought my gain 

Recall. 

Though thousand rivers from my eyes descend, 

I Zindarud, where gard’ners tend. 

Recall ; 

And crushed by sorrow that finds no relief. 

Those who brought solace to my grief 

Recall. 

No more from hafiz’ lips shall secrets pass: 

Those who once kept them, I, alas ! 

Recall. 

H. BICKNELL 


15 A MAD HEART 
I 

Long years my heart had made request 
Of me, a stranger, hopefully 
(Not knowing that itself possessed 
The treasure that it sought of me). 
That Jamshid’s chalice I should win 
And it would see the world therein. 


AH 


97 


7 



That is a pearl by far too rare 
To be contained within the shell 
Of time and space; lost vagrants there 
Upon the ocean’s margin, well 
We know it is a vain surmise 
That we should hold so great a prize. 

II 

There was a man that loved God well; 

In every motion of his mind 

God dwelt; and yet he could not tell 

That God was in him, being blind: 

Wherefore as if afar he stood 

And cried, ‘‘Have mercy, O my God I” 

III 

This problem that had vexed me long 
Last night unto the taverner 
I carried; for my hope was strong 
His judgement sure, that could not err. 
Might swiftly solve infallibly 
The riddle that had baffled me. 

I saw him standing in his place, 

A goblet in his grasp, a smile 
Of right good cheer upon his face. 

As in the glass he gazed awhile 
And seemed to view in vision clear 
A hundred truths reflected there. 

IV 

“That friend who, being raised sublime 
Upon the gallows, glorified 
The tree that slew him for his crime. 
This was the sin for which he died. 
That, having secrets in his charge. 

He told them to the world at large.” 

98 



So spake he; adding, ^‘But the heart 
That has the truth within its hold 
And, practising the rosebud’s art. 

Conceals a mystery in each fold. 

That heart hath well this comment lined 
Upon the margin of the mind. 

When Moses unto Pharaoh stood. 

The men of magic strove in vain 
Against his miracle of wood; 

So every subtlety of brain 
Must surely fail and feeble be 
Before the soul’s supremacy. 

‘‘And if the Holy Ghost descend 
In grace and power infinite 
His comfort in these days to lend 
To them that humbly wait on it. 

Theirs too the wondrous works can be 
That Jesus wrought in Galilee.” 

V 

“ What season did the Spirit wise 
This all-revealing cup assign 
Within thy keeping?” “When the skies 
Were painted by the Hand Divine 
And heaven’s mighty void was spanned. 

Then gave He this into my hand.” 

“Yon twisted coil, yon chain of hair 
Why doth the lovely Idol spread 
To keep me fast and fettered there?” 

“Ah, Hafiz!”, so the wise man said, 

“’Tis a mad heart, and needs restraint 
That speaks within thee this complaint.” 

A. j. A. 


99 


7-2 



i6 CUP IN HAND 


When my Beloved the cup in hand taketh 
The market of lovely ones slack demand taketh. 

I, like a fish, in the ocean am fallen, 

Till me with the hook yonder Friend to land taketh. 

Every one saith, who her tipsy eye seeth, 

“Where is a shrieve, that this fair firebrand taketh?” 

Lo, at her feet in lament am I fallen. 

Till the Beloved me by the hand taketh. 

Happy his heart who, like Hafiz, a goblet 
Of wine of the Prime Fore-eternars brand taketh. 

J. PAYNE 


17 NOT ALL THE SUM OF EARTHLY 
HAPPINESS 

Not all the sum of earthly happiness 
Is worth the bowed head of a moment^s pain. 
And if I sell for wine my dervish dress. 

Worth more than what I sell is what I gain! 

Land where my Lady dwells, thou boldest me 
Enchained; else Fars were but a barren soil. 

Not worth the journey over land and sea. 

Not worth the toil! 

Down in the quarter where they sell red wine, 
My holy carpet scarce would fetch a cup — 

How brave a pledge of piety is mine. 

Which is not worth a goblet foaming up I 
Mine enemy heaped scorn on me and said: 
“Forth from the tavern gate!” Why am I thrust 
From off the threshold? is my fallen head 

Not worth the dust? 


100 



Wash white that travel-stained sad robe of thine! 
Where word and deed alike one colour bear. 

The grape’s fair purple garment shall outshine 
Thy many-coloured rags and tattered gear. 

Full easy seemed the sorrow of the sea 
Lightened by hope of gain — hope flew too fast 1 
A hundred pearls were poor indemnity. 

Not worth the blast. 

The Sultan’s crown, with priceless jewels set. 

Encircles fear of death and constant dread; 

It is a head-dress much desired — and yet 
Art sure ’tis worth the danger to the head? 

’Twere best for thee to hide thy face from those 
That long for thee; the Conqueror’s reward 
Is never worth the army’s long-drawn woes, 

• Worth fire and sword. 

Ah, seek the treasure of a mind at rest 
And store it in the treasury of Ease ; 

Not worth a loyal heart, a tranquil breast. 

Were all the riches of thy lands and seas I 
Ah, scorn, like Hafiz, the delights of earth. 

Ask not one grain of favour from the base. 

Two hundred sacks of jewels were not worth 

Thy soul’s disgrace! 

GERTRUDE BELL 


i8 SLAVES 

Slaves of thy shining eyes are even those 
That diadems of might and empire bear; 

Drunk with the wine that from thy red lip flows. 
Are they that e’en the grape’s delight forswear. 
Drift, like the wind across a violet bed. 

Before thy many lovers, weeping low. 

And clad like violets in blue robes of woe. 

Who feel thy wind-blown hair and bow the head. 


lOI 



Thy messenger the breath of dawn, and mine 
A stream of tears, since lover and beloved 
Keep not their secret; through my verses shine. 

Though other lays my flower’s grace have proved 
And countless nightingales have sung thy praise. 

When veiled beneath thy curls thou passest, see, 

To right and leftward those that welcome thee 
Have bartered peace and rest on thee to gaze! 

But thou that knowest God by heart, away! 

Wine-drunk, love-drunk, we inherit Paradise, 

His mercy is for sinners; hence and pray 
Where wine thy cheek red as red erghwan dyes, 

And leave the cell to faces sinister. 

Oh Khizr, whose happy feet bathed in life’s fount, 

Help one who toils afoot — the horsemen mount 
And hasten on their way; I scarce can stir. 

Ah, loose me not ! ah, set not Hafiz free 
From out the bondage of thy gleaming hair! 

Safe only those, safe, and at liberty. 

That fast enchained in thy linked ringlets are. 

But from the image of his dusty cheek 

Learn this from Hafiz : proudest heads shall bend, 

And dwellers on the threshold of a friend 
Be crowned with the dust that crowns the meek. 

GERTRUDE BELL 

19 LAST NIGHT I DREAMED 

Last night I dreamed that angels stood without 
The tavern door, and knocked in vain, and wept; 

They took the clay of Adam, and, methought. 

Moulded a cup therewith while all men slept. 

Oh dwellers in the halls of Chastity! 

You brought Love’s passionate red wine to me, 

Down to the dust I am, your bright feet stept. 


102 



For Heaven’s self was all too weak to bear 
The burden of His love God laid on it. 

He turned to seek a messenger elsewhere. 

And in the Book of Fate my name was writ. 

Between my Lord and me such concord lies 
As ma'kes the Huris glad in Paradise, 

With songs of praise through the green glades they flit. 

A hundred dreams of Fancy’s garnered store 
Assail me — Father Adam went astray 
Tempted by one poor grain of corn! Wherefore 
Absolve and pardon him that turns away 
Though the soft breath of Truth reaches his ears. 

For two-and-seventy jangling creeds he hears. 

And loud-voiced Fable calls him ceaselessly. 

That, that is not the flame of Love’s true fire 
Which makes the torchlight shadows dance in rings. 

But where the radiance draws the moth’s desire 
And sends him forth with scorched and drooping wings. 
The heart of one who dwells retired shall break, 
Rememb’ring a black mole and a red cheek, 

And his life ebb, sapped at its secret springs. 

Yet since the earliest time that man has sought 
To comb the locks of Speech, his goodly bride. 

Not one, like Hafiz, from the face of Thought 
Has torn the veil of Ignorance aside. 

GERTRUDE BELL 


20 CONVERSATION 

“Ah, when shall I to thy mouth and lips attain?” 
“’Fore God, but speak, for thy word is sovereign.” 
“’Tis Egypt’s tribute thy lips require for fee.” 

“In such transaction the less the loss shall be.” 



“What lip is worthy the tip of thy mouth to hold?” 

“To none but initiates may this tale be told.” 

“Adore not idols, but sit with the One, the True!” 

“In the street of Love it is lawful both to do.” 

“The tavern’s breath is balm to the spirit’s smart.” 

“And blessed are they that comfort the lonely heart.” 

“No part of faith is the dervish cloak and the wine.” 

“Yet both are found in this Magian faith of mine.” 

“ What gain can coral lips to an old man bring?” 

“ A honeyed kiss, and his youth’s recovering.” 

“And when shall bridegroom come to the couch of the bride?” 
“The morn that Moon and Jupiter stand allied.” 

“ Still Hafiz prays for thy yet ascending might.” 

“ So pray and praise the angels in heaven’s height.” 

A. j. A. 


21 SPRING 

Cypress and Tulip and sweet Eglantine, 

Of these the tale from lip to lip is sent; 

Washed by three cups, oh Saki, of thy wine, 

My song shall turn upon this argument. 

Spring, bride of all the meadows, rises up, 

Clothed in her ripest beauty: fill the cup! 

Of Spring’s handmaidens runs this song of mine. 

The sugar-loving birds of distant Ind, 

Except a Persian sweetmeat that was brought 
To fair Bengal, have found nought to their mind. 
See how my song, that in one night was wrought. 
Defies the limits set by space and time I 
O’er plains and mountain-tops my fearless rhyme. 
Child of a night, its year-long road shall find. 


104 



And thou whose sense is dimmed with piety. 

Thou too shalt learn the magic of her eyes ; 

Forth comes the caravan of sorcery 
When from those gates the blue-veined curtains rise. 
And when she walks the flowery meadows through, 
Upon the jasmine’s shamed cheek the dew 
Gathers like sweat, she is so fair to see! 

Ah, swerve not from the path of righteousness 
Though the world lure thee! like a wrinkled crone. 
Hiding beneath her robe lasciviousness, 

She plunders them that pause and heed her moan. 

From Sinai Moses brings thee wealth untold; 

Bow not thine head before the calf of gold 
Like Samir, following after wickedness. 

From the Shah’s garden blows the wind of Spring, 

The tulip in her lifted chalice bears 
A dewy wine of Heaven’s minis t’ ring; 

Until Ghiyasuddin, the Sultan, hears. 

Sing, Hafiz, of thy longing for his face. 

The breezes whispering round thy dwelling-place 
Shall carry thy lament unto the King. 

GERTRUDE BELL 

22 THE ROSE RETURNS 

Returns again to the pleasaunce the rose, alive from the dead; 
Before her feet in obeisance is bowed the violet’s head. 

The earth is gemmed as the skies are, the buds a zodiac band. 
For signs in happy ascendant and sweet conjunction spread. 

Now kiss the cheek of the Said to sound of tabor and pipe. 

To voice of viol and harp-string the wine of dawntide wed. 

The rose’s season bereave not of wine and music and love. 

For as the days of a man’s life her little week is fled. 


105 



The faith of old Zoroaster renews the garden again, 

For lo, the tulip is kindled with fire of Nimrod red. 

The earth is even as Eden, this hour of lily and rose; 

This hour, alas! Not an Eden’s eternal dwelling-stead I 

The rose with Solomon rides, borne aloft on wings of the wind; 
The bulbul’s anthem at dawn like the voice of David is shed. 

Fill high the bowl to our lord’s name, ‘Imad-ud-Din Mahmud; 
Behold King Solomon’s Asaph in him incarnated. 

Beyond eternity’s bounds stretch the gracious shade of his might; 
Beneath that shadow, O hafiz, be thine eternity sped. 

WALTER LEAF 


23 TULIPS 

When from the goblet’s eastern brim shall rise 
The gladd’ning sun-beams of our sparkling wine; 

To grace the maid, tulips of richest dyes 

Shall on her cheek’s empurpled garden shine. 

The gale shall spread yon hyacinthine wreaths 
O’er the warm bosom of the blushing rose; 

When, scented by those locks, it softly breathes 
From the sweet maze where many a flow’ret blows. 

The night that parts a lover from his love. 

Is fraught with such distress, such tender wail; 

That scanty would an hundred volumes prove. 

To register the fond, the mournful tale. 

Be thine the steady patience, that sustain’d 
The prophet Noah, when the deluge rose; 

Then shall the wish of countless years be gain’d. 

And joyful terminate thy lengthen’d woes. 

106 



The fav’rite hope, long foster’d in thy breast. 

Thy single effort never will obtain: 

The wish’d success on various aids must rest; 

Without those aids thy own attempts are vain. 

O, let not avarice tempt thy wild desires 

To toil for wealth in fortune’s glitt’ring mine! 

Small is the pittance mortal man requires. 

And trifling labour makes that pittance thine. 

Should the sweet gales, as o’er thy tomb they play. 

The fragraunce of the nymph’s lov’d tresses bring; 
Then, Haufez, shall new life inspire thy clay. 

And ceaseless notes of rapture shalt thou sing. 

J. NOTT 


24 I CEASE NOT FROM DESIRE 

I cease not from desire till my desire 
Is satisfied; or let my mouth attain 
My love’s red mouth, or let my soul expire. 

Sighed from those lips that sought her lips in vain. 
Others may find another love as fair; 

Upon her threshold I have laid my head. 

The dust shall cover me, still lying there. 

When from my body life and love have fled. 

My soul is on my lips ready to fly. 

But grief beats in my heart and will not cease. 
Because not once, not once before I die. 

Will her sweet lips give all my longing peace. 

My breath is narrowed down to one long sigh 
For a red mouth that burns my thoughts like fire; 
When will that mouth draw near and make reply 
To one whose life is straitened with desire? 

107 



When I am dead, open my grave and see 
The cloud of smoke that rises round thy feet: 

In my dead heart the fire still burns for thee; 

Yea, the smoke rises from my winding-sheet I 
Ah, come, Beloved 1 for the meadows wait 
Thy coming, and the thorn bears flowers instead 
Of thorns, the cypress fruit, and desolate 
Bare winter from before thy steps has fled. 

Hoping within some garden ground to find 
A red rose soft and sweet as thy soft cheek. 

Through every meadow blows the western wind, 
Through every garden he is fain to seek. 

Reveal thy face! that the whole world may be 
Bewildered by thy radiant loveliness ; 

The cry of man and woman comes to thee, 

Open thy lips and comfort their distress 1 
Each curling lock of thy luxuriant hair 
Breaks into barbed hooks to catch my heart, 

My broken heart is wounded everywhere 

With countless wounds from which the red drops start. 

Yet when sad lovers meet and tell their sighs, 

Not without praise shall Hafiz’ name be said. 

Not without tears, in those pale companies 
Where joy has been forgot and hope has fled. 

GERTRUDE BELL 

25 LIGHT IN DARKNESS 
High-nesting in the stately fir, 

The enduring nightingale again 
Unto the rose in passionate strain 
Singeth: “All ill be far from her! 

“In gratitude for ’this, O rose. 

That thou the Queen of Beauty art. 

Pity the nightingales’ mad heart. 

Be not contemptuous of those.” 

108 



I do not rail against my fate 
When thou dost hide thy face from me 
Joy wells not of propinquity 
Save in the heart once desolate. 

If other men are gay and glad 
That life is joy and festival, 

I do exult and glory all 
Because her beauty makes me sad. 

And if for maids of Paradise 
And heavenly halls the monk aspires, 
The Friend fulfils my heart’s desires. 
The Tavern will for heaven suffice. 

Drink wine, and let the lute vibrate; 
Grieve not ; if any tell to thee, 

“Wine is a great iniquity”, 

Say, “Allah is compassionate!” 

Why, Hafiz, art thou sorrowing. 

Why is thy heart in absence rent? 
Union may come of banishment. 

And in the darkness light doth spring. 


26 O ASK NOT 

O love, how have I felt thy pain! 

Ask me not how — 

O absence, how I drank thy bane! 

Ask me not how — ■ 

In quest, throughout the world I err’d. 
And whom, at last, have I preferr’d ? 

O ask not whom — 

In hope her threshold’s dust to spy. 
How streamed down my longing eye! 
O ask not how — 



Why bite my friends their lips, displeas’d? 
Know they what ruby lip I seiz’d? 

O ask not when — 

But yester-night, this very ear 
Such language from her mouth did hear — 
O ask not what — 


Like Hafiz, in love’s mazy round. 

My feet, at length, their goal have found, 
O ask not where. 


H. H. 


27 SHIRAZ 

Shiraz, city of the heart, 

God preserve thee ! 

Pearl of capitals thou art. 

Ah I to serve thee. 

Ruknabad, of thee I dream. 

Fairy river: 

Whoso drinks thy running stream 
Lives for ever. 

Wind that blows from Ispahan, 
Whence thy sweetness? 

Flowers ran with thee as thou ran 
With such fleetness. 

Flowers from Jafarabad, 

Made of flowers; 

Thou for half-way house hast had 
Musella’s bowers. 

Right through Shiraz the path goes 
Of perfection; 

Anyone in Shiraz knows 
Its direction. 


no 



spend not on Egyptian sweets 
Shiraz money; 

Sweet enough in Shiraz streets 
Shiraz honey. 

East Wind, hast thou aught to tell 
Of my gipsy? 

Was she happy? Was she well? 

Was she tipsy? 

Wake me not, I pray thee, friend. 

From my sleeping; 

Soon my little dream must end; 

Waking’s weeping. 

Hafiz, though his blood she spill. 

Right he thinks it; 

Like mother’s milk ’tis his will 
That she drinks it. 

R. LE GALLIENNE 

28 RANG THROUGH THE DIM TAVERN 
Rang through the dim tavern a voice yesterday, 

“Pardon for sins! Drinkers of wine, drink! Ye may! ” 
Such was the word; hear the good news, Angel-borne; 
Mercy divine still to the end holds its way. 

Great are our sins ; greater is God’s grace than all ; 

Deep are his hid counsels, and who says them nay? 

Bear her away. Reason the Dull, tavernwards. 

There shall the red wine set her pale veins a-play. 

Union with Him strife or essay forceth not; 

Yet, O my heart, e’en to the full, strive, essay. 

Still is my ear ringed of His locks ringleted. 

Still on the wine-threshold my face prone I lay. 

HAFIZ, awake! Toping no more counts for sin. 

Now that our Lord Royal hath put sins away. 

WALTER LEAF 


III 



29 THE LESSON OF THE FLOWERS 


’Twas morning, and the Lord of day 
Had shed his light o’er Shiraz’ towers, 

Where bulbuls trill their love-lorn lay 
To serenade the maiden flowers. 

Like them, oppressed by love’s sweet pain, 

I wander in a garden fair; 

And there, to cool my throbbing brain, 

I woo the perfumed morning air. 

The damask rose with beauty gleams, 

Its face all bathed in ruddy light. 

And shines like some bright star that beams 
From out the sombre veil of night. 

The very bulbul, as the glow 
Of pride and passion warms its breast, 

Forgets awhile its former woe 
In pride that conquers love’s unrest. 

The sweet narcissus opes its eye, 

A teardrop glistening on the lash. 

As though ’twere gazing piteously 
Upon the tulip’s bleeding gash. 

The lily seemed to menace me. 

And showed its curved and quivering blade. 

While every frail anemone 
A gossip’s open mouth displayed. 

And here and there a graceful group 
Of flowers, like men who worship wine. 

Each raising up his little stoup 
To catch the dewdrop’s draught divine. 

II2 



And others yet like Hebes stand. 

Their dripping vases downward turned. 

As if dispensing to the band 

The wine for which their hearts had burned. 

This moral it is mine to sing : 

Go learn a lesson of the flowers; 

Joy’s season is in life’s young spring. 

Then seize, like them, the fleeting hours. 

E, H. PALMER 


30 HOPE 

What though a thousand enemies propose 
To slay me. 

With thee my loving friend, how shall my foes 
Affray me? 

This is my hope of life, to hold thee nigh 
To cherish; 

Absent, it is my constant fear that I 
Must perish. 

(Each breath the breeze brings not to me her scent 
I languish. 

E’en as the mournful rose, whose robe is rent 
In anguish.) 

Shall slumber drowse my senses, and mine eyes 
Not view thee? 

Or, being far, my heart not agonize 
To woo thee? 

Better than others’ balm, thy blade to endure 
Doth please me; 

Thy mortal poison, than another’s cure 
To ease me. 


AH 


”3 


8 



Slain by thy sword, eternal life is mine 
To inherit; 

To die for thee, were benison divine 
Of spirit. 

Swerve not thy steed; spare not thy lance’s tip 
Nor falter; 

My head shall be thy mark, my hand yet grip 
Thy halter. 

(Yet how shall every sight attain to thy 
True being? 

For as the mind doth know, so much the eye 
Hath seeing.) 

All men shall say that Hafiz hath renown 
Immortal, 

Whene’er his head gaineth its dusty crown, 

Thy portal. 

A. j. A. 


31 GIVE 

Give, O Give love’s sportful joys; 
Youth, and all that youth employs; 
Wine like rubies bright, and red; 
And the board with dainties spread; 
Gay associates, fond to join 
In the cup of circling wine! 

Give the handmaid’s lip divine, 
Blushing deeper than her wine; 
Minstrels vers’d in tuneful art; 

And the friend that’s next our heart; 
With the valued, chearful soul. 
Drainer of the brim-full bowl 1 

Give the nymph, that’s tender, kind. 
Pure in heart, and pure in mind, 

1 14 



As th’ unsullied fount that laves 
Eden’s banks with blissful waves, 

And whose beauty sweetly bright 
Shames the clear moon’s full-orb’d light! 

Give the festive hall, that vies 
With our boasted Paradise; 

Round it, breathing rich perfume, 

Let refreshing roses bloom; 

Such as, with unfading grace. 

Deck the blest abode of peace 1 

Give companions, who unite 
In one wish, and one delight; 

Brisk attendants, who improve 
All the joys of wine and love; 

Friends who hold our secrets dear, 

And the friend who loves good cheat! 

Give the juice of rosy hue. 

Briskly sparkling to the view. 

Richly bitter, richly sweet. 

Such as will exhilarate: 

While the fair-one’s rubi’d lip 
Flavours ev’ry cup we sip. 

Give the girl, whose sword-like eye 
Bids the understanding die. 

Tempting mortals to their fate 
With the goblet’s smiling bait; 

Damsels give with flowing hair. 

Guileful as the hunter’s snare! 

Give, to spend the classic hour. 

One deep-read in learned lore. 

One, whose merry, tuneful vein 
Flows like our gay poet’s strain. 

And whose open generous mind 
Blesses and improves mankind! 





Mortals, wilfully unwise. 

Who these mirthful gifts despise, 

Entertain no pleasing sense 
Of voluptuous elegance: 

Scarce of such can it be said. 

That they differ from the dead. 

J. NOTT 


32 WHERE ARE THE TIDINGS OF UNION? 

Where are the tidings of union? that I may arise — 

Forth from the dust I will rise up to welcome thee! 

My soul, like a homing bird, yearning for Paradise, 

Shall arise and soar, from the snares of the world set free. 

When the voice of thy love shall call me to be thy slave, 

I shall rise to a greater far than the mastery 
Of life and the living, time and the mortal span : 

Pour down, oh Lord 1 from the clouds of thy guiding grace 
The rain of a mercy that quickeneth on my grave. 

Before, like dust that the wind bears from place to place, 

I arise and flee beyond the knowledge of man. 

When to my grave thou turnest thy blessed feet. 

Wine and the lute thou shalt bring in thine hand to me. 

Thy voice shall ring through the folds of my winding-sheet. 
And I will arise and dance to thy minstrelsy. 

Though I be old, clasp me one night to thy breast. 

And I, when the dawn shall come to awaken me. 

With the flush of youth on my cheek from thy bosom will rise. 

Rise up 1 let mine eyes delight in thy stately grace I 

Thou art the goal to which all men’s endeavour has pressed. 

And thou the idol of Hafiz’ worship ; thy face 

From the world and life shall bid him come forth and arise! 


GERTRUDE BELL 



33 THE LIGHT DIVINE 

1 

Within the Magian tavern 
The light of God I see; 

In such a place, O wonder! 

Shines out such radiancy. 

Boast not, O king of pilgrims, 

The privilege of thee: 

Thou viewest God’s own Temple; 
God shews Himself to me. 

2 

Combed from the fair ones’ tresses 
I win sweet musk to-day. 

But ah I the distant fancy 
That I should gain Cathay. 

3 

A fiery heart, tears flowing. 

Night’s sorrow, dawn’s lament — 

All this to me dispenses 
Your glance benevolent, 

4 

My fancy’s way thine image 
Arresteth momently; 

Whom shall I tell, what marvels 
Within this veil I see? 

Not all the musk of China, 

The scents of Tartary, 

Excel those subtle odours 
The dawn breeze wafts to me. 


117 



5 

If Hafii; plays at glances, 

Friends, be not critical: 

For truly, as I know him, 

He truly loves you all. 

A. j. A 


54 DUST 

Come, let us pass this pathway o’er 
That to the tavern leads ; 

There waits the wine, and there the door 
That every traveller needs. 

On that first day, when we did swear 
To tipple and to kiss. 

It was our oath, that we would fare 
No other way but this. 

Where Jamshid’s crown and royal throne 
Go sweeping down the wind, 

’Tis little comfort we should moan: 

In wine is joy to find. 

Because we hope that we may bring 
Her waist to our embrace, 

Lo, in our life-blood issuing 
We linger in this place. 

Preacher, our frenzy is complete: 

Waste not thy sage advice; — 

We stand in the Beloved’s street. 

And seek not Paradise. 

Let Sufis wheel in mystic dance 
And shout for ecstasy; 

We, too, have our exuberance. 

We, too, ecstatics be. 

ii8 



The earth with pearls and rubies gleams 
Where thou hast poured thy wine ; 

Less than the dust are we, it seems. 

Beneath thy foot divine. 

Hafiz, since we may never soar 
To ramparts of the sky. 

Here at the threshold of this door 
Forever let us lie. 

A. j. A. 

35 SEASON OF THE ROSE 

The season comes, that breathes of joy, 

In rosy garment drest; 

Let mirth, my friends, your care employ; 

O, hail the smiling guest ! 

Old-age now warns us to improve 
The vernal hours with wine and love. 

To the fond wishes of the heart 
How few are gen’rous found I 
And the sweet hours, which bliss impart. 

Pass on in hasty round : 

Then, for the wine I love so well. 

My sacred carpet I will sell. 

The gale, that smells of spring, is sweet; 

But sweeter, should the fair. 

With winning elegance replete. 

Its grateful freshness share : 

By her gay presence chear’d, we pass 
With brisker glee the rosy glass. 

Soft sweep the lyre of trembling strings ; 

’Twill fate’s black rage suppress; 

Fate o’er the child of merit flings 
The mantle of distress : 

Then let loud sorrow’s wailing cry 
Be drown’d in floods of melody. 

119 



With boiling passion’s eager haste, 

Comes forth the blushing rose; 

Shall we not wine like water waste, 

Soft dashing as it flows? 

Now that our throbbing bosoms prove 
The wild desires of hope, and love. 

O Haufez ! thy delightful lay. 

That on the wild wind floats. 

Resembles much, our poets say. 

The nightingale’s rich notes; 

What wonder then, thy music flows 
In the sweet season of the rose. 

J. NOTT 


36 MYSTERY 

I 

Monarch of firs that stately rise. 

Of honeyed lips sole emperor, 

The arrows of whose flashing eyes 
Transfix the bravest conqueror — 

Lately in wine as passing by 
This lowly beggar he espied, 

“O thou”, he said, “the lamp and eye 
Of such as make sweet words their pride I 

“ How long of silver and of gold 
Shall thy poor purse undowered be? 

Be thou my slave, and then, behold! 

All silver limbs shall cherish thee. 

“Art thou a mote, my little one? 

Be not so humble: play at love! 

And thou shalt whisper to the sun. 
Whirling within its sphere above. 


120 



“Put not thy trust in this world’s vows; 

But if thou canst a goblet get, 

Enjoy the arched and lovely brows, 

The bodies soft and delicate I ” 

2 

Then spake my elder of the bowl 
(Peace to his spirit Allah grant I) : 

“ Entrust not thy immortal soul 
To such as break their covenant. 

“Leave enemies to go their road; 

Lay hold upon the Loved One’s hem; 

As thou wouldst be a man of God, 

Such men are devils : heed not them.” 

3 

I walked where tulips blossomed red, 

And whispered to the morning breeze : 

“ Who are yon martyrs cold and dead, 

Whose bloody winding-sheets are these?” 

“Hafiz”, he answered, “’tis not mine 
Or thine to know this mystery; 

Let all thy tale of ruby wine, 

And sugar lips, and kisses be!” 

A. J. A. 


37 RAPTURE’S VISION 

Say, where is rapture’s vision? Eyes on the Loved One bending. 
More high than kingly splendour. Love’s fane as bedesman 
tending. 

Light ’twere, desire to sever forth from the soul, but natheless 
Soul-friends depart asunder — there, there the pain transcending I 

Fain in the garden budlike close-wrapped were I, thereafter 
Frail reputation’s vestment bloomlike asunder rending; 


I2I 



Now like the zephyr breathing love-tales in roses’ hearing. 

Now from the yearning bulbul love’s myst’ry apprehending. 

While yet the hand availeth, sweet lips to kiss delay not; 

Else lip and hand thou bitest too late, when comes the ending. 

Waste not the hour of friendship; outside this House of Two 
Doors 

Friends soon shall part asunder, no more together wending. 

Clean out of mind of Sultan Mansur hath hafiz wandered; 
Lord, bring him back the olden kind heart, the poor befriending. 

WALTER LEAF 


38 WINE WORSHIP 

Saki, the dawn is breaking; 

Fill up the glass with wine. 

Heaven’s wheel no delay is making — 
Haste, haste, while the day is thine! 

Ere to our final ruin 

Space and the world speed by, 

Let wine be our great undoing. 

Red wine, let us drink and die 1 

See, on the bowl’s horizon 
Wine, the red sun, doth rise: 

Here’s glory to feast the eyes on — 
Drive sleep from thy languid eyes ! 

When Fate on his wheel is moulding 
Jars from this clay of mine, 

Let this be the cup thou’rt holding 
And fill up my head with wine 1 

Never was I a shrinker. 

No hypocrite monk am I; 

Let wine, the pure wine of the drinker 
Be the talk men address me by. 


122 



Wine is the sole salvation, 

Its worship and works sublime; 

Be firm thy determination, 

Hafiz — be saved in time! 

A. j. A. 


39 HARVEST 

In the green sky I saw the new moon reaping. 

And minded was I of my own life’s field: 

What harvest wilt thou to the sickle yield 
When through thy fields the moon-shaped knife goes sweeping? 

In other fields the sunlit blade is growing, 

But still thou sleepest on and takest no heed; 

The sun is up, yet idle is thy seed : 

Thou sowest not, though all the world is sowing* 

Back laughed I at myself : All this thou’rt telling 
Of seed-time! The whole harvest of the sky 
Love for a single barley-corn can buy. 

The Pleiads at two barley-corns are selling. 

Thieves of the starry night with plunder shining, 

I trust you not, for who was it but you 
Stole Kawou’s crown, and robbed great Kaikhosru 
Of his king’s girdle — thieves, for all your shining 1 

Once on the starry chess-board stretched out yonder 
The sun and moon played chess with her I love. 

And, when it came round to her turn to move. 

She played her mole — and won — and can you wonder? 

Ear-rings suit better thy small ears than reason, 

Yet in their pink shells wear these words to-day: 

“ HAFIZ has warned me all must pass away — 

Even my beauty is but for a season.” 

R. LE GALLIENNE 


123 



40 ALL MY PLEASURE 

All my pleasure is to sip 
Wine from my beloved’s lip; 

I have gained the utmost bliss — 

God alone be praised for this. 

Fate, my old and stubborn foe, 

Never let my darling go: 

Give my mouth the golden wine 
And her lips incarnadine. 

(Clerics bigoted for God, 

Elders who have lost the road — 

These have made a tale of us 
“Drunken sots and bibulous.” 

Let th’ ascetic’s life be dim, 

I will nothing have of him ; 

If the monk will pious be, 

God forgive his piety!) 

Darling, what have I to say 
Of my grief, with thee away, 

Save with tears and scalding eyes 
And a hundred burning sighs? 

Let no infidel behold 
All the bitterness untold 
Cypress knows to see thy grace. 

Jealous moon to view thy face. 

It is yearning for thy kiss 
That hath wrought in Hafiz this, 

That no more he hath in care 
Nightly lecture, matin prayer. 

A. j. A. 


124 



41 THE RIDDLE OF LIFE 


With last night’s wine still singing in my head, 

I sought the tavern at the break of day, 

Though half the world was still asleep in bed; 
The harp and flute were up and in full swing. 
And a most pleasant morning sound made they; 
Already was the wine-cup on the wing. 
‘‘Reason”, said I, “’tis past the time to start. 

If you would reach your daily destination, 

The holy city of intoxication.” 

So did I pack him off, and he depart 
With a stout flask for fellow-traveller. 

Left to myself, the tavern-wench I spied. 

And sought to win her love by speaking fair; 
Alas ! she turned upon me, scornful-eyed. 

And mocked my foolish hopes of winning her. 
Said she, her arching eyebrows like a bow : 

“ Thou mark for all the shafts of evil tongues ! 
Thou shalt not round my middle clasp me so. 
Like my good girdle — not for all thy songs ! — 
So long as thou in all created things 
Seest but thyself the centre and the end. 

Go spread thy dainty nets for other wings — 
Too high the Anca’s nest for thee, my friend.” 

Then took I shelter from that stormy sea 
In the good ark of wine; yet, woe is me! 

Saki and comrade and minstrel all by turns, 

She is of maidens the compendium 
Who my poor heart in such a fashion spurns. 
Self, HAFIZ, self! That must thou overcome! 
Hearken the wisdom of the tavern-daughter! 



Vain little baggage — well, upon my word! 

Thou fairy figment made of clay and water, 

As busy with thy beauty as a bird. 

Well, HAFIZ, Life’s a riddle — give it up: 

There is no answer to it but this cup. 

R. LE GALLIENNE 


42 THE DRUNKARD 

Come, vex me not with this eternal spite ; 

For old companionship demands its right. 

Heed then my counsel, costlier and more rare 
Than all the jewels in thy casket there. 

Yet how to drunkards shall thy face be shown 
That holds a mirror to the sun and moon? 

Chide not the drunkard, greybeard; peace, be still; 

Or wouldst thou quarrel with the Heavenly will? 
Fearest thou not the fiery breath of me 
Shall burn the woollen cassock circling thee? 

Pour me the wine of yesternight again 
To ease the throbbing of a bankrupt’s brain. 

Hafiz, thy songs of songs are loveliest; 

I swear it, by the Scriptures in thy breast ! 

A. j. A. 


43 MAN OF SELF 

Man of Self, lifted up with endless pride. 

We forgive thee — for Love to thee is denied. 

Hover not round the raving lovers’ haunts; 

Take thy “Reason Supreme” for goal and guide! 

What of Love’s drunken frenzy knows that brain 
That the grape’s earthly juice alone hath plied? 

126 



Get a Moon-love, and teach thy heart to strive. 

Though thy fame, like a sun, be spread world-wide. 

’Tis the white face, the anguish-burdened sigh, 

Tell the secrets the heart of love would hide. 

Let the bowl clear the fumes that rack thy brain; 

HAFIZ, drink deep, and name and fame be defied. 

WALTER LEAF 


44 ROSE AND NIGHTINGALE 

I walked within a garden fair 
At dawn, to gather roses there; 

When suddenly sounded in the dale 
The singing of a nightingale. 

Alas, he loved a rose, like me, 

And he, too, loved in agony; 
Tumbling upon the mead he sent 
The cataract of his lament. 

With sad and meditative pace 
I wandered in that flowery place. 

And thought upon the tragic tale 
Of love, and rose, and nightingale. 

The rose was lovely, as I tell; 

The nightingale he loved her well; 

He with no other love could live. 

And she no kindly word would give. 

It moved me strangely, as I heard 
The singing of that passionate bird; 

So much it moved me, I could not 
Endure the burden of his throat. 


127 



Full many a fair and fragrant rose 
Within the garden freshly blows, 

Yet not a bloom was ever torn 
Without the wounding of the thorn. 

Think not, O Hafiz, any cheer 
To gain of Fortune’s wheeling sphere; 

Fate has a thousand turns of ill. 

And never a tremor of good will. 

A. j. A. 


45 LOVE’S LANGUAGE 

Breeze of the morning, at the hour thou knowest. 

The way thou knowest, and to her thou knowest. 

Of lovely secrets trusty messenger, 

I beg thee carry this despatch for me; 

Command I may not : this is but a prayer 
Making appeal unto thy courtesy. 

Speak thus, when thou upon my errand goest ; 

‘‘My soul slips from my hand, so weak am I; 

Unless thou heal it by the way thou knowest, 

Balm of a certain ruby, I must die.” 

Say further, sweetheart wind, when thus thou bio west : 
“ What but thy little girdle of woven gold 
Should the firm centre of my hopes enfold? 

Thy legendary waist doth it not hold, 

And mystic treasures which thou only knowest?” 

Say too : “ Thy captive begs that thou bestowest 
The boon of thy swift falchion in his heart; 

As men for water thirst he to depart 
By the most speedy way of death thou knowest. 

“ I beg thee that to no one else thou showest 
These words I send — in such a hidden way 
That none but thou may cipher what I say; 

Read them in some safe place as best thou knowest.” 


128 



When in her heart these words of mine thou sowest 
For HAFIZ, speak in any tongue thou knowest; 

Turkish and Arabic in love are one — 

Love speaks all languages beneath the sun. 

R. LE GALLIENNE 


46 SAKI SONG 

I 

Come, saki, come, your wine ecstatic bring, 
Augmenting grace, the soul’s perfectioning ; 

Fill up my glass, for I am desperate — 

Lo, bankrupt of both parts is my estate. 

Bring, saki, bring your wine, and Jamshid’s bowl 
Shall therewith bear to view the vast void whole; 

Pour on, that with this bowl to fortify 
I may, like Jamshid, every secret spy. 

Bring, saki, bring your alchemy divine 
Where Korah’s wealth and Noah’s years combine; 
Pour on, and there shall open forth to thee 
The gates of fame and immortality. 

Bring wine, O saki, and its image there 
To Jamshid and Chosroes shall greeting bear; 

Pour on, and to the pipe’s note I shall say 
How Jamshid fared, and Ka’us, in their day. 

Sing of this old world’s ways, and with your strings 
Make proclamation to those ancient kings. 

Still spreads the same far desert to be crossed 
Where Salm and Tur their mighty armies lost; 

Still stands the selfsame crumbling hostelry 
Afrasiyab took his palace for to be. 

Where now the captains that his armies led. 

And where the sword-swift champion at their head ? 
High was his palace; ruin is its doom; 

Lost now to memory his very tomb. 


AH 


129 


9 



2 


Bring, saki, bring your virgin chastely veiled, 

Your tavern-dweller drunkenly regaled; 

Fill up, for I am avid of ill fame. 

And seek in wine and bowl my utmost shame. 

Bring, saki, bring such brain-enflaming juice 
As lions drink, and let wide havoc loose ; 

Pour on, and lion-like Fll break the snare 
Of this old world, and rise to rule the air. 

Bring wine, O saki, that the houris spice 
With angel fragrance out of Paradise; 

Pour on, and putting incense to the fire 
The mind’s eternal pleasure I’ll acquire. 

Bring, saki, bring your throne-bestowing wine : 

My heart bears witness it is pure and fine; 

Pour on, that, shriven in the tide of it, 

I may arise triumphant from the pit. 

Why must I yet the body’s captive be. 

When spiritual gardens call to me? 

Give me to drink, till I am full of wine. 

Then mark what wisdom and what power are mine ; 
Into my keeping let your goblet pass. 

And I will view the world within that glass ; 
Intoxicate, of saintliness I’ll sing. 

And in my beggar’s rags I’ll play the king. 

When Hafiz lifts his voice in drunken cheer, 

Venus applauds his anthem from her sphere. 

A. j. A. 


130 



47 WILD DEER 


Whither fled, wild deer? 

I knew thee well in days gone by, 
When we were fast friends, thou and I ; 
Two solitary travellers now. 
Bewildered, friendless, I and thou, 

We go our separate ways, where fear 
Lurks ambushed, front and rear. 

Come, let us now enquire 
How each is faring; let us gain 
(If gain we may, upon this plain 
Of trouble vast, where pastures pure 
From fear secure 

Are not to find) the spirit’s far desire. 


Beloved friends, declare: 

What manner of man is there 
That shall the lonely heart befriend. 
That shall the desolate attend? 

Khizer, the heavenly guide. 

He of the footfall sanctified. 
Perchance he cometh, and shall bring 
In purpose deep and mercy wide 
An end of all my wayfaring. 

3 

’Twas little courtesy 
That ancient comrade shewed to me. 
Moslems, in Allah’s name I cry! 

The pitiless blow he struck me by. 



So pitiless, to strike apart 

The cords that bound us heart to heart, 

To strike as if it were 
No love was ever there. 

He went; and I that was so gay 
To grief convert; was such the way 
Brother should act with brother? Yea, 

Khizer, the heavenly guide. 

He of the footfall sanctified, 

Haply the shadow of his gracious wing 
Lone soul to lonely soul shall bring. 

4 

But surely this the season is 
When of the bounty that is His 
Allah dispenses; for I took 
Lately this omen from the Book : 

“Leave me not issueless!” the Prophet cried. 

It happened on a day one sat beside 
The road, a rare bold fellow; when there went 
Upon that way a traveller intent 
To gain the goal. Gently the other spake: 

“ What in thy scrip, Sir traveller, dost thou take? 

If it be truly grain, come, set thy snare.” 

The traveller answered, “Grain indeed I bear; 

But, mark this well, the quarry I would win 
Shall be the Phoenix.” “Certes, then how begin 
The quest?” the other asked. “What sign has thou 
To lead thee to his eyrie? Not till now 
Have we discovered any mark to guide 
Upon that quest. By what weight fortified 
Shall our dire need those scales essay to hold 
Wherein the sun hath cast his purse of gold?” 


132 



5 

Since that cypress tall and straight 
Joined the parting camel-train, 

By the cypress sit, and wait 
Watchful till he come again. 

Here, beside the bubbling spring 
Where the limpid river runs, 

Softly weep, remembering 
Those beloved departed ones. 

As each pallid ghost appears. 

Speak the epic of thy pain. 

While the shower of thy tears 
Mingles with the summer rain. 

And the river at thy feet 
Sadly slow, and full of sighs, 

Tributaries new shall meet 
From the fountains of thine eyes. 

6 

Give never the wine-bowl from thy hand. 

Nor loose thy grasp on the rose’s stem; 

’Tis a mad, bad world that the Fates have planned— 
Match wit with their every strategem ! 

Comrades, know each other’s worth; 

And when ye have this comment lined 
Upon the margin of the mind, 

Recite the text by heart : 

So say the moralists of this earth; 

For lo, the archer ambushed waits, 

Th’ unerring archer of the Fates, 

To strike old friends apart. 

7 

When I take pen in hand to write 
And thus my marshalled thoughts indite, 

By the Eternal Pen, 

What magic numbers then 


135 



Flow from my fingers, what divine 
And holy words are mine I 
For I have mingled Soul with Mind, 

Whereof the issuing seed I have consigned 
To music’s fruitful earth; 

Which compound brings to birth 
(As having for its quintessential part 
Of poesy the purest art) 

Most gladsome mirth. 

Then come, I bid thee; let this fragrant scent 
Of fairest hope, and soft content. 

Bear to thy soul delight eternal : 

For verily the musk’s sweet blandishment 
Was sprinkled from the robe of sprites supernal; 

It was not wafted here 
From that wild, man-forsaking deerl 

A. j. A 


48 THE TIMES ARE OUT OF JOINT 

Again the times are out of joint; and again 

For wine and the loved one’s languid glance I am fain. 

The wheel of fortune’s sphere is a marvellous thing : 

What next proud head to the lowly dust will it bring? 

Or if my Magian elder kindle the light. 

Whose lantern, pray, will blaze aflame and be bright? 

’Tis a famous tale, the deceitfulness of earth; 

The night is pregnant: what will dawn bring to birth? 
Tumult and bloody battle rage in the plain : 

Bring blood-red wine, and fill the goblet again! 

A. J. A 


134 



49 the crier 

Send the criers round the market, call the royst’rers’ band to hear. 

Crying, “O yes! All ye good folk through the Loved One’s 
realm, give ear! 

‘‘ Lost, a handmaid ! Strayed a while since ! Lost, the Vine’s wild 
daughter, lost! 

Raise the hue and cry to sei2e her! Danger lurks where she is 
near. 

“Round her head she wears a foam-crown; all her garb glows 
ruby-hued; 

Thief of wits is she; detain her, lest ye dare not sleep for fear. 

“Whoso brings me back the tart maid, take for sweetmeat all 
my soul! 

Though the deepest hell conceal her, go ye down, go hale her 
here. 

“ She’s a wastrel, she’s a wanton, shame-abandoned, rosy- red ; 

If ye find her, send her forthright back to 

HAFIZ, Balladier.” 

WALTER LEAF 


50 ISMAIL 

Ismail is dead, of men and cadis best: 

His pen, like its great master, takes its rest. 

Much wrote he of God’s law, and lived it too — 
Would I could say as much for me and you! 

The middle of the week he went away — 

The month of Rajab it was, and the eighth day. 


135 



In this uncertain dwelling ill at ease, 

To a more ordered house he went for peace. 

His home is now with God, and if you write 
“The mercy of God’", interpreting aright 

The mystic letters standing side by side, 

You then shall read the year when Ismail died. 

R. LE GALLIENNE 


136 



NOTES 




I 

MQ I, B I, RS I, F I, P I. 

Metre : 1 '-^ | | ^ . 

Order of lines :B+RS 124356 7. F I 2 3 4 6 5 7. P as MQ. 

1. First hemistich was stated by the Turkish commentator 
Sudi (d. 1006/1598) to be a quotation {tadmhi) from the Umayyad 
caliph-poet Yazid b. Mu‘awiya (d. 64/683); and this statement 
has been accepted by most modern editors without question. 
But Mirza Muhammad Qazvini in an article contributed to the 
Tehran periodical Yadgar (vol. r, no. 9, pp. 69-78) argues cogently 
in rejection of the attribution. 

2. For -Ajcx F reads ^j. For the alternative interpretations of 
see WC, i, 2. 

3. For F reads For fy\ RS -f-P read cSU.. The poet 
compares this world with the alighting-place (tnan^U) of a caravan- 
train; every moment the bell of a camel departing from the 
caravanserai warns all other travellers that their lodgment there 
is only temporary, and that they too must soon be quitting this 
life. 

4. The (“Magian elder”) is the symbol of the man 

intimate with all the secrets of life; he knows by experience that 
reason is powerless to solve the ultimate riddle of the universe 
(cf. 38), and that it is only the wine of unreason that makes life 
in this world a tolerable burden. For a fuller treatment of this 
theme, see no. 15. The terms sdlik and manual belong to the 
technical vocabulary of the Sufis, see R. A. Nicholson, The Mystics 
of Islam, p. 28. 

5. A fine description of the “dark night of the soul”; the 
imagery of the sea is more common in Persian mystical poetry 
than might have been expected of a people little given to sea- 
faring. WC, I, 3 gives the usual interpretations of “the light- 


159 



NOTES 


burthened ones of the shores ” ; it seems more probable, however, 
that the poet is here referring, as so often, to the orthodox 
worshipper (whether ritualist or Sufi) whose feet are firmly 
planted on his faith so that he has no comprehension of the 
agonies of the insatiably inquisitive soul. 

6. ForjjS" P reads oT It is the eternal affliction of the lover 
of God that he is constrained by the ecstasy of his emotion to 
reveal the secret that should remain hidden; so did Hallaj, who 
paid for his indiscretion upon the gallows, see 1 5 The biography 
of the poet ‘Iraqi offers an excellent illustration of this theme, 
see my of Lovers, pp. xv-xvi. 

7. The pattern of the poem is completed by rounding it off, 
as it was begun, with a hemistich in Arabic. 

AJA translates 1234657. 

Other verse-translations by GB, JP, HB, RAN, JR, RG. 

2 

MQ 2, B 12, RS 12, P 5. 

^ ul u* 

Metre : O — — . 

Order of lines: B + RS 1327456 8. Pi 3245678. 

1. By saldb the poet clearly intends formal righteousness; he 
has abandoned the safe piety of the ritualist for the dissolute 
intoxication of unreason; so 1. 3 expands the theme. 

2. The cloister and penitential robes of the Sufi are as unsatis- 
fying and hypocritical to the true lover as the formal religion of 
the orthodox theologian and lawyer. 

3 . Listening to music was condemned by the orthodox as an un- 
lawful pleasure, and many Sufi sects agreed with this prohibition; 
cf. Tale 20 in chapter 2 of Sa‘di’s Gulistdn (my Kings and Beggars, 
pp. 84-6). The hearing of sermons on certain days was on the 
other hand a well-approved exercise, and many Sufi books, e.g. 
the Kitdb sitfin majdlis of ‘Abd al-Qadir al-JilM (d. 561/1166) are 
collections of such addresses. 


140 



NOTES 


4. The hearts of the enemies of God (the ritualists) are like 
extinguished candles, they do not blaze with the flame of love 
kindled by the contemplation of the Divine beauty. Cf. R. A. 
Nicholson’s translation (Eastern Poetry and Prose^ p. 173) of a 
fragment from Hafiz: 

“Of this fierce glow that Love and You 
Within my breast inspire, 

The Sun is but a spark that flew 
And set the heavens afire I” 

5. For P reads “The dust which collects on the 

tomb (of a saint) and the railing is considered to be sacred. ... It 
is carefully swept up and sold in small quantities to pilgrims, and 
when they are making the circumambulation of the tomb, those 
who have sore eyes will put their fingers through the railing, to 
get a bit of this dust and rub it on their eyes. It is used also to 
cure burns, or other wounds, and swellings; it is thought to 
possess the power to raise the dead and is often given to one in 
a swoon.” B. A. Donaldson, The Wild Kue, p. 67. 

6. The dimple in the chin of the Beloved is a pitfall for the 
unwary traveller; yet the desolation of unrequited love is a 
necessary condition of the pilgrim’s progress. 

7. “Love seemed at first an easy thing”; but the early rapture 
of discovery, the delirious joy of the Beloved’s mocking glances and 
playful reproofs, was soon followed by the long sorrow of exile. 

8. For J P reads 

EB translates (or rather paraphrases) 142-3568. Other 
verse-translations by GB, JP, HB. 

3 

MQ 3, B 8, RS 8, F 2, P 6. 

Metre : jlL, w |w |w . 

Order of lines : B 4- RS 123485679. F123546789. 

P as MQ. 


141 



NOTES 


For a detailed discussion of this poem, see my article “ Orient 
Pearls at Random Strung” in BSOAS, xi, 4 (1946). 

1. The Shirazi Turk is a symbol of fair-skinned, youthful 
beauty; the Hindu (black mole) is in apposite contrast. Samar- 
kand and Bokhara are the most famous cities of ancient Turkestan 
— an appropriate dowry for the Turk migrant to Persian Shiraz, 
for Hafiz forever the loveliest of cities. 

2. The blue waters of the Ruknabad and the red roses of the 
Musalla complete (with the ruby wine) the poet’s colour-scheme, 
as do their melodious names his word-picture. 

3. For lulls (gipsy singers) and the “Feast of Plunder”, see 
GB, p. 15 1. 

4. Self-sufficiency {istighna) is the characteristic of the Divine 
beauty; God does not require our love, yet it is our overpowering 
need that we should love Him. 

5. The story of Joseph and Potiphar’s wife is a favourite 
symbol with the Persian poets of the mystic love ; the foundation 
of the legend in the Qur’an is found in Sura xii, 23-54. Love 
for the Divine beauty lures the true lover from the chastity of 
formal faith to the infamy of helpless unreason. 

6. For the first hemistich as given in the text, B 4- RS + F read 

«ml iJUt j which is a tadmln from Sa‘di. 

It seems probable that the variants represent the poet’s own 
changes of mind, rather than any copyist’s error. 

7. The poet is addressing himself, rather than (as WJ and GB 
make out) the ShirazI Turk; the “wise old man” is the usual 
Magian elder. It is probably unsafe to conjecture from the men- 
tion of “happy youths” that this poem belongs to Hafiz’ early 
period; the phrase is used to balance the reference to the pir\ 
and the poem has all the marks of maturity. 

8 . An excellent statement of the poet’s philosophy of unreason ; 
hikmat is the key- word — the intellect is powerless to fathom the 
mystery of life : in this particular context, the paradox of the cruel 


142 



NOTES 


self-sufficiency of beauty, drawing the lover out of the peace and 
safety of his formal faith and leading him onward through the 
wilderness of boundless suffering. Hence, his only consolation 
is to be found in the ecstasy of the experience of spiritual love. 

9. Has this splendid close a double entendre — an appeal to the 
generosity of the hoped-for patron? 

WJ translates 123485769. 

Other verse-translations by GB, JP, HB, WL, RG, EGB, AJA. 

4 

MQ 4, B 9, RS 9, P 9. 

Metre : cl) — — | \j — ^ — |ww-— , 

Order of lines :B-fRS 1263457*8. Pas MQ. 

1. For a full treatment of the Wild Deer theme, see no. 47. 

For P reads cJ-^* 

2. The “sugar-cracking parrot'’ is of course the poet. 

3. For ui-JUo. B+RS-f-P read The rose is here (as 

frequently, cf. 44) a symbol of self-sufficient beauty; the nightin- 
gale of the helpless lover. 

4. For v-iiaJ j B -f- RS read 

5. Cf. 478. 

7. The first hemistich is a tadmJn from Sa'di: 

(J ^ cl) ^ J clr, J 

^ j ^ ^ 

B -h RS add a line after this verse : 

ij J ■■ “ ^ J ^ ^ ^4 kiAV I J immmJ L^- I 

This, however, is merely an inferior doublet of verse 6. 

8. For -d B + RS + P read For ^j^B+RS-f-P read ^L«/. 

TL translates 1235748. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 


143 



NOTES 


5 

MQ 9, B 7, RS 7, P 8. 

Metre : O . 

Order of lines :B+RS 123456879*10. Pas MQ. 

4. The “moon"’ is, of course, the face of the young beloved; 
the “polo-stick of pure ambergris”, the curved black love-lock, 
sometimes compared with a dark cloud obscuring the radiant 
effulgence of the beloved’s beauty; so, as here, bringing the lover 
to a distraction of grief and bewilderment. 

5. For CrJ P reads ok For B+P read j HB 

translates : 

“I fear that tribe of mockers who topers’ ways impeach. 

Will part with their religion the tavern’s goal to reach.” 

6. This obscure line (which the commentators explain 
variously) is omitted by JR. HB translates: 

“To men of God be friendly: in Noah’s ark was earth 
Which deemed not all the deluge one drop of water worth.” 

He adds the note: “By ‘earth’ is to be understood Noah himself. 
Although he was a mortal, his sanctity caused him to be preserved 
from the Flood.” RS explains similarly, adding that Noah did 
not fear the flood at all. Indian commentators see in khaki a 
reference to the doctrine of Muhammad the Logos {vide R. A. 
Nicholson, Studies in Islamic Mysticism^ p. 87), but this is surely 
far-fetched. The obscurity arises from the poet’s desire to use the 
elegance of the two elements (earth and water) in a single line; 
for the mention of all four elements in two lines, see E. G. Browne, 
Chahdr Maqdla (transL), p. 47. Taking the line in its context, the 
poet appears to be referring to himself: though the troubled 
world without threatens to engulf every living thing in a flood 
of calamities, here is one man safely lodged in the ark of his 
defiant faith of unreason who fears not the uttermost catastrophe; 
therefore, O lovely one, befriend him, recalling that all the earth’s 


144 



NOTES 


riches are but perishing dross, and come forth from your hiding- 
place; shake off the black lock that conceals your beauty, and 
look upon your lover with favour. But see Mirza Muhammad 
in Yadgar^ vol. i, pt. 8, pp. 61-3. 

9. The “moon of Canaan’’ is Joseph, the prototype of perfect 
beauty; see the note on 3 5 and the Qur’anic passage there referred 
to. The poet offers his Joseph the “throne of Egypt” — his own 
heart. After this line B 4- RS add another: 

^ ^ ^ I iAj ‘1 ^ ^ 

Ij i -<1 L 6 ^ J 

This, however, seems to be a doublet of verse 4, possibly a 
copyist’s quotation glossing it. 

JR translates 123 5789*4 10. 

Other verse-translations by JP, JN, HB. 

6 

MQ 37, B 32, RS 13, F 5, Q 16. 

Metre O ly^ ^ | — | — — | — . 

Order of lines :B+RS 123456978 10 ii. Fi2*34568 
9 10 II. P I 2 * 6 9 3 4 5 7 8 10 II. 

2. Ta^alluq sc. attachment to other than the Divine beloved, 
i.e. to this perishing castle of hope, the world. After this line 
F + P add : 

j I oUj 

This addition certainly improves the sequence. 

3. For 4.^1^ j B +RS read 

4. The sidra is a tree standing at the farthest boundary of 
paradise, where Muhammad had his second vision of Gabriel, 
see Qur’an liii, i 3-17. The poet thus compares his own revelation 
in the tavern with that vouchsafed to the Prophet; and in 1 . ii 


AH 


145 


lO 



NOTES 


claims divine inspiration for his poetry — a claim repeated several 
times elsewhere, as in 47^®. 

5 . It is only in the intoxication of the vision of unreason that 
man rises to his original home in heaven, cf. 46^®“^ and contrast 348. 

6. The pun on the word hadtth (= tale. Prophetic tradition) 
is clearly deliberate; the taverner has his own Traditions to 
recount, and the poet is acting as his rdwt\ as we learn from the 
next verse, the taverner is here himself merely a transmitter, and 
states his isnad direct; if indeed this line (7) is not merely a doublet 
of 6, as the repeated rhyme strongly suggests. 

9. The second hemistich is a tadmin from Auhadi (d. 7 3 8/ 1 3 3 7) : 


The poem in which this line occurs was obviously studied by 
Hafiz closely when writing the present lyric, for our poet quotes 
from it several times : 

(SJjj 


^ J 1 JjO J ^ \j 


10. For B + RS +F + P read 
AJA translates 12*345689 10 ii. 
Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 


7 

MQ 26, B 44, RS, 25 P 70. 

M 

Metre : jj-yoX# 0 3^ (J-*j w — |v-/v^ — |v^v-/ — — . 

Order of lines unvaried. 

1-3. The poet appears here (as elsewhere often) to describe 

146 



NOTES 


an actual incident that occurred to him, and then to use it as a 
text for his meditations. 

4. For JLiU B + RS read which is clearly inferior. 

5 . The alast is the day of man’s creation, when God said 
Alastu bi-Kabbikum? (Am I not your Lord?) and man replied 
Bald (Yes); see GB’s note on p. 153 and cf. the Qur’anic 
sanction is Sura vii, 171. 

6. For B +RS read 

7. Cf. 8". 

WL translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 

8 

MQ 25, B 43, RS 24, P 67. 

Metre : j o kj — yu — | kj | — | kj , 

Order of lines unvaried. 

3. For istighnd see note on 3^. The Qur’anic sanction appears 
to be Sura lxiv, 6 : “ The messengers (of God) were ever coming 
to them with clear tidings, and they said. Shall a man be our 
guide? And they disbelieved, and turned away. And God was 
independent Iwa- staghnd ^lldhu)\ and God is absolute {ghanJ), 
worthy of praise.” 

4. The “double-door of the world” is clearly birth and death, 
see WL, p. 69, and cf. i^, 37^ 

5 . The poet puns bald (yes) and bald (sorrow), suggesting that 
it was the cup of sorrow man agreed to drink on creation’s day 
(see note on 7^) ; the fact of coming into existence meant separa- 
tion from the Divine beloved, and life is a perpetual grief of 
separation relieved only from time to time by the ecstatic God- 
given vision of union, ever to be followed in turn by the renewal 
of the dark night of the soul. 

7. Asaf (Asaph) was Solomon’s minister; the wind was his 


147 


10-2 



NOTES 


Steed (cf. Qur’an xxxviii, 37; xxxiv, 12); and he understood the 
language of the birds (cf. Qur’an xxvii, 16). For B-f RS 
read manifestly in error. 

8. The sequence is perfect : it is idle to lift oneself up to worldly 
renown and glory, for all worldly honours are nothing worth — 
the arrow soars merely to fall in the dust. 

9. For +RS read 

GB translates 123456789. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, WL. 

9 

MQ 46, B 34, RS 15, P 52. 

Metre: ^ 3 * 

v_^|w . 

Order of lines: B-fRS 123546789 10 ii. P1243657 
8 9 10 II. 

1 . For (j B 4* RS + P read ; but cf. 1 . 1 1 . 

2. The beautiful face of the beloved is as often compared with 
the full moon. 

3. P reads y ^Jl. 

4. For P reads » For J P reads y* , For 
P reads . For B + RS read y . 

5. For ijL» B + RS-hP read For (Sy^ j 

B 4- RS -f- P read L-iJj ^ j y, 

6. For^^^U- jl P reads . For^^^li Jj P reads j . 

For J I B 4- RS read ; P reads j . 

7. For iS B 4* RS 4- P read It is a common poetic legend 
that treasures lie concealed in ruins; the poet here gives a most 
elegant turn to the conceit. 

8. The poet here summari2:es the doctrine of the Malamati 
sect of the Sufis, who held that salvation lies in courting the 

148 



NOTES 


condemnation of mankind, and acted accordingly; a theory 
admirable enough in itself which in later times occasioned grave 
scandals fatal to the repute of Islamic mysticism. 

9. For P reads 

10. For the functions of the muhtasih see R. Levy in 'Encjclo- 

paedia of Islam y vol. iii, pp. For B + RS + P read v • 

11. The ‘‘festival of the fast” is the 'id al-filTy celebrated on 
I Shauwal to mark the end of Ramadan; and perhaps this poem 
was actually written for such an occasion ; though it is more likely 
that it marks the return of an absent friend, or the renewed favour 
of a beloved. 

TL translates i 2 5 4 1 1 . 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 

10 

MQ 61, B 31, RS 12, P 37. 

ul 

Metre : O — ^ — | — — 

Order of lines :Pi23465 7. B-f-RSas MQ. 

3. For jlj B reads . For the conceit, see note on 1^. 

5. For j Js RS reads The heart is called 

sanauharl because its shape resembles a fir-cone; the adjective is 
used in modern Persian for the pituitary or pineal gland. 

JHH translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

11 

MQ 81, B 77, RS 58, P 48. 

Metre : |v^v^ — . 

Order of lines :B-f-RS 12435678. Pas MQ. 

5. The garden of Iram is said to have been planted in the 
sandy deserts near Aden by the legendary king Shaddad, grandson 


149 



NOTES 


of Iram; according to the Qur’an (Sura lxxxix, 6-8) and its 
commentators, it was destroyed by God in a great flood (cf. Sura 
XXXIV, 1 6) together with its builders. SudI in his annotation to 
this verse says that the poet composed it in the Bagh-i Iram of 
Shah Shuja‘, ruler over extensive territories in Persia (d. 786/1 3 84) ; 
it is certain that Hafiz lived for some time at his court: he men- 
tions him in several lyrics (see 2 8 7 ) and wrote a chronogram on 
his death. 

6. The heroic king of ancient Persia, Jamshid, is said to have 
had a magic cup in which the whole world could be seen; 
similarly Alexander is credited with the possession of a mirror 
having identical properties. The poet meditates as always on the 
transitory nature of earthly glory; love is the only immortal, too 
great a mystery to be mouthed by man (verse 7 : RL and GB have 
erred), too great a grief withal to be concealed (verse 8). 

RL translates 12345678. 

Other verse-translations by GB, JP. 

12 

MQ 90, B 82, RS 63, P 36. 

Metre: 

Order of lines: B 4-RS 123465897 10. Pas MQ. 

I. King Solomon is said to have sent the hoopoe as his 
messenger to Bilqis, the Queen of Sheba; for the full story see 
GB, pp. 148-9; the Qur’anic sanction is Sura xxvii, 20-38. 

3. From this to verse 8 (excluding verse 7) is surely to be 
taken as the message sent by Hafiz on the “wings of the morning 
breeze” to his faithful absent friend; the translators do not 
appear to have seen this. 

7. This verse best follows verse 9 (as in B + RS) and is the 
completion of the heavenly message ; the poet compares the wine- 
cup (the symbol of unreason) with the all-revealing mirror of 


150 



NOTES 


Alexander. For this idea, cf. 155. For the significance of the 
heavenly messenger (verse 9), cf. 6^. 

9. The poet changes his theme with his mood; love is the 
supreme sorrow, and the wine-cup of unreason its only solace. 

10. This is surely a broad hint from the poet to his patron for 
a royal gift, cf. GB, p. 150, and the story of Farrukhi in E. G. 
Browne, Chahdr maqdla (transL), p. 44 : ‘‘ He also ordered Farrukhi 
to be given a horse and equipment suitable to a man of rank, as 
well as two tents, three mules, five slaves, wearing apparel and 
carpets.” 

GB translates 123465897 lo. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

13 

MQ loi, B 199, RS 83, P 175. 

Ui Ul 

Metre : O — . 

Order of lines: B+RS 123456879*10. Pas MQ. 

1. The poet rejects as void the solitary joys of the anchorite 
(the sohtary, cell-dwelling Sufi, cf. 2^) in favour of the convivial 
joys of the tavern (the ecstatics’ circle). The translators miss this 
point. 

2. For the sentiment cf. 3^ and note. 

4. HB takes the point better: “With reverence grasp the 
goblet.” The idea of the wine-cup being made of the clay of 
the dead, or of dead kings is a commonplace in Persian poetry; 
cf. FitzGerald’s Kubd^iydt, xxxvii; Jamshid, Bahman, [Kai]- 
kubad, [Kai]-ka’us and Kai-[khusrau] are ancient Persian kings; 
see GB, p. 165. For the catalogue of names, cf. 467~^. 

6. For the romance of Shirin and Farhad (incorporated by 
Nizami into his Khusrau Shmn)y see GB, pp. 165-6. 

7. One of the loveliest lines in Hafiz, epitomizing his philo- 
sophy of unreason as the only solution to the riddle of the world’s 
impermanence. 



NOTES 


8. For the conceit of the treasure in the ruins, see note on 9^. 

9. For Musalla and Ruknabad — the beauty-spots of Shiraz — 

see 5% The poem was perhaps written in answer to an 

invitation to visit a patron abroad. After this line B + RS add : 

10. GB takes the alternative explanation offered by the com- 
mentators on the second hemistich; it seems more probable, 
however, that the poet meant by ahrlsham-i tarah the silken string 
of music, balancing the allusion to the harp in the first hemistich. 
For the combination wine + music, cf. 3^, 22^. 

GB translates 123456879*10. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 


14 

MQ 103, B 253, RS 139, P 180. 

tti 

Metre — v-/ — |— w — |— — . 

Order of lines: B+RS 12345*6. Pi§2345 6. 

1 . After this line P adds : 

iili -ib oljb j (jijiiilij J JoUj 

But it is frigid and worthless. 

2. For .ibi B+RS read o:>\i . HB glosses, “‘Be it sweetl’ — 

an expression used at drinking parties apparently reading 
(jUI^ which breaks the rhyme. The reference is of 

course to the sweet singing of the revellers. 

4. For j B + RS read !>b . Does the poet intend this 

line ironically? 

5 . The Zinda-rud is a famous river at Isfahan, see GB, p. 17 1 ; 
Hafiz says in another place: 

Aj jl b* J ^ c-jI dJjj 


152 



NOTES 


The poet evidently recalls a visit to Isfahan and a patron there 
who now neglects him. After this line B +RS add: 

This, however, is merely an inferior doublet of verse 4. 

6. For Ujj ^ B 4- RS read jT ^ . 

HB translates 12345*6. 

Other verse-translations by JP, RG, GB. 


15 

MQ 142, B 123, RS 9, F sep.. Pin. 

ui 

Metre : o cJ^J |w'^— . 

Order of lines : B + RS 12345867910. Fi26348*79 

510. P I 2 3 4 8 * 5 7 9 6 10. 

1. This is one of the finest poems of Hafiz; at the same time 

its text exhibits remarkable variants, especially in the order of 
the lines. AJA in his translation follows the edition of F in his 
pamphlet D//-/ shaidd-ji Hdfii^y which may be studied with advan- 
tage as representing a vigorously new approach to the criticism 
of the poem. For the cup of Jamshid, see note on for the 
heart as a mirror of the world, cf. i27. The hadtth beloved of the 
Sufis no doubt underlies the train of thought: AHs ^ 

“ Who knows himself knows his Lord.” 

2. P reads ^ ^ ^ 

P 4- F read cj . The poet seems to refer in the second hemistich to 
those “ light-burthened ones of the shore”, the formal Muslims 
(see note on 1 5 ) who will not venture upon the ocean of unreason 
in quest of the pearl of Divine cognition. 

3. By »a^ar is meant the mystic’s intuitive vision, see L. Mas- 

signon, La Passion d* al-Hallaj ^ p. 853. For the riddle, cf. and 
note, 3®* \ 

153 



NOTES 


4. See note on 12 7. 

5 . Can any doubt remain after this verse that Hafiz intends by 
the imagery of the wine-cup the ecstatic’s rapt vision? Note the 
word hakim \ God is the only philosopher; man’s own man-made 
hikmat is unworthy of the name (cf. 3 8). The name hakim is 
frequently given to God in the Qur’an. 

6. For jj^ P reads For ji B+RS+P read jl j. For 
Ij I xk. F + P read b 1 ^ . 

7. For lt I B 4 -RS -f F + P read oT. For B + RS + F 4- P 

read For F reads The Samiri is a magician 

who made a calf “of saffron hue” for the Israelites to worship, 
see Qur’an, Sura xx, 85 ff. The “staff” and “white hand” were 
symbols of Moses’ divine wizardry, see Sura xx, 1 8 ff. 

8. The reference is to Husain b. Mansur al-Hallaj, “martyr- 
mystic of Islam” (d. 309/921), who was gibbeted on the charge 

of uttering blasphemy, notably the phrase Hi “I am the 
truth”. The poet explains his crime as being that of revealing the 
unutterable mystery of the love of God in the ecstasy of his 
emotion; cf. io7. After this line P 4-F add: 

J Ij jjjiJ J (J I j 

j J I 09^ 

[For a 5 oTj P reads For P reads . For^U. P reads 
. For P reads .] 

10. For uJJ B -I-RS read ^ ui3j . The ringlets of 

the beloved which veil the effulgent beauty of his face (cf. 5 ^ and 
note) are also a chain to keep the lover’s mad heart under restraint, 
else he must wholly lose his reason. 

AJA translates 126348*795 lo. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, WL. 


154 



NOTES 


16 

MQ 148, B 151, RS 37, P 193. 

Metre: 7 ^^ — ^—|v^ . 

Order of lines : B + RS 13245. P as MQ. 

5. See note on 7^. This line gives a mystical meaning to what 
is otherwise the simplest and lightest of Hafiz’ lyrics, highly 
reminiscent in style of the early lyrics of Sana’i. 

JP translates i 3245. 

Other verse-translations by HB, WL. 

17 

MQ 151, B 142, RS 28, P 206. 

Metre : jlLv ^ . 

Order of lines : B + RS i * 2 3 § 5 4 6 7. P as MQ. 

I. For the second hemistich cf. H. After this line B (in 
parentheses) h-RS add: 

a.: jj j» J ^ ^ ^ ^ 

l/J ^ 

[RS omits 0^4^ breaking the metre; B reads for dr I ^.] This 
line, however, breaks the sequence and is rightly rejected. 

3. After this line B + RS add: 

Lf 

[B reads I ^ for y I .] This line again breaks the sequence, 
and is perhaps a doublet of verse i. 

5. For ^ B +RS -fP read . For ob>t> (>^1 (for the phrase 
and its significance see 5^ with note) P reads dL . Contrast 

I*, 15^; here the poet is clearly speaking of the vanity of worldly 
ambition. 

155 



NOTES 


6. A splendid message to the present times ! 

w 

7. For B + RS -f P read . The poem perhaps marks 
Hafi:z’ reaction to a failure to win the favour of a patron; unless 
it is all to be taken mystically. 

GB translates 1*2355467. 

Other verse-translations by JP, RG. 

18 

MQ 195, B 137, RS 23, P 131. 

Metre : O — w — j -ow — | vj — w — j — . 

Order of lines :B-f-RS 142635879*. Pi 36427859. 

2. GB has misunderstood j which here means “informer’’; 
the scented breeze of morning and the flooding tears betray the 
secret of love otherwise well guarded. RS translates correctly : 

“ Dich verrieth der Wind des Morgens, 

Mich des Auges Wasserfluth: 

Und doch wahren sonst Verliebte 
Ihr Geheimniss treu und gut.” 

3. For j P reads For B+RS+P read 

which is obviously inferior; especially in the context of 
the next line, where the image of the violets tossing restlessly 
beneath the tyranny of the fair one’s locks is a superb conceit. 
Perhaps, however, the following emendation improves : 

jfjj ^ i 

JjJ 1 J 1 (J J J ^ 

J J y 

jjJ Ij Oj Lw J J ^ 

Such a rearrangement gives far better balance (note the repetition 
of v-iJj) and is more in the character of the poet. 

4. For JJA Ij 1 ^ B 4- RS + P read \j 1 . 

156 



NOTES 


7. Cf. 47^’ a passage strikingly similar to the present. Khidr 
is confounded in Muslim legend with Elias, and is said to have 
guided Alexander in his quest of the Fountain of Life; see GB, 
pp. 15 8-9. Hafiz appears to represent himself as a neophyte of 
these mysteries ; his companions are intimate with them. 

8. For G B+RS+P read , less elegantly; the poet calls 
from the door of the tavern. The erghwan is the crimson Judas 
tree. 

9. Cf. 15^° for the sentiment; submission is the only salvation, 
intellectual enquiry is profitless. After this line B (in parentheses) 
+ RS read : 

Ij ^ 1 *.* " ' ^ ^ ^ L>i5" Lm Aii 1 ^ ^ ^ j 

A double signature would, however, be most unusual, and the 
line introduces a theme extraneous to the poem. 

GB translates 142635879*. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 

19 

MQ 184, B 222, RS 108, P 141. 

ul 

Metre : O — |ww — . 

Order of lines : B + RS i235*46§7. P125 36*47. 

1. For the MusHm legend of creation, see GB, pp. 169-71. 
This and the following line appear to describe an actual vision 
of the poet, in which he saw himself being served with wine by 
angels out of a cup fashioned of Adam’s dust. In his spiritual 
fervour he sees himself the sole heir of creation (verse 3), an idea 
familiar enough to the “intoxicated” Sufis; cf. my Niffarl, pp. 
30(8), 193-5, 156(18). GB has not understood the poem too 
well. 

2. Forcl^w oij B-fRS reado>^* liU.; cf. 47^^ and note. The 
second hemistich means “they sprinkled the wine of drunkenness 
over me”. 


157 



NOTES 


3. God created man to be his vice-gerent; see Qur’an, Sura ii, 
30; VI, 166. For the Sufi doctrine, see R. A. Nicholson, Studies in 
Islamic Mysticism, pp. 113, 130, 156. 

4. Cf. ‘Umar Khaiyam: 

^ yo (Jxl-C- J ^ dij j\ jl j 

And Fitzgerald : 

“ The Grape that can with Logic absolute 
The two-and-seventy jarring sects confute; 

The sovereign Alchemist that in a trice 
Life’s leaden metal into Gold transmute.” 

3. For :>}} P reads lyT. This line is presumably to be taken in 
close conjunction with the following: the “concord” is that of 
complete submission, which consumes the human will as the 
moth is consumed by the flame. For B+RS+P read 

After this line B + RS (and P after verse 6) add: 

A) U J I j» J I 6j (J U y^ J J ^ y* b» 
On the meaning, see GB, p. 171. 

6. After this line B + RS add: 

dJ Aj U Lx Ic j> j Iri. (jT 

7. For .ilA 5 o B 4- RS 4- P read . For ^ Ij B 4- RS 4- P 

read but the text of MQ gives an excellent balance 

between adiodjl and 

GB translates 1235*4657. 

Other verse-translations by GP, HB. 


158 



NOTES 


20 

MQ 198, B 136, RS 22, F 6, P 135. 

Metre: ^Ua-^ 

\J I —KJ — \J I KJ j — KJ — , 

Order of lines :Pi2346578 9. B+RS+Fas MQ. 

1. This is one of Hafiz’ few conversation-pieces : a curious and 

remarkable technique, reminiscent of the JlJ-^ and of the 

learned treatises, and, in particular, the shorter mystical tracts of 
Suhrawardi Maqtul, e.g. the ^Aql~i surkh (ed. Mahdi BayanI, 
Isfahan 13 19/1940). The poet imagines a conversation between 
an old Sufi and a beautiful boy who is the focus of his meditation. 

2. The tribute of Egypt, Egypt being the wealthiest province 
of the Muslim empire. 

3. For P reads which destroys the elegant 

verbal play. 

4. The elder seeks to draw the boy forth from the tavern to 
the temple ; the boy replies that in his religion God is worshipped 
through the adoration of his image in material beauty — a funda- 
mental doctrine of this school of Sufis, and a practice which led 
inevitably to grave scandals. 

6. How can the wearer of the khirqa of renunciation be a 
wine-bibber? The Magian faith resolves this dilemma too. 

8. RS following the commentators identifies khwdja with 
Hafiz’ patron Qiwam al-Din Hasan (the minister of Shah Shuja‘), 
involving a play on the words mushtari and mah\ but this seems 
rather far-fetched. For T F reads 

9. For jl B+RS-f-F-fP read which must surely be adopted 
unless the interpretation of RS is accepted, to the ruination of an 
otherwise perfect poem. 

AJA translates 123456789. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 


159 



NOTES 


21 

MQ 225, B 158, RS 44, P 214. 

Metre: OySi* Cf^ 

w|— V^ — w|w w|— 'w-/— . 

Order of lines: B+RS 12345*6578. Pas MQ. 

1 . For the circumstances alleged as attending the composition 
of this poem, see GB, p. 1 73 : Cypress, Tulip and Rose are supposed 
to be the names of three handmaidens who nursed Ghiyath al-Din 
Purabi of Bengal during a sickness. RS quoting Sudi explains 
the three cups as referring to the practice of drinking three glasses 
of wine after a meal to fidelity; WC speaks of three morning cups 
to purge the body of ill-humours. I strongly suspect, however, 
that the poet is here referring to a discussion (bahth) between 
commentators, probably of his day, on a tradition (hadltB) relating 
to the ritual washing of the dead; and that he intends a double 
entendre — winter is departed, let us lave its corpse with wine. 

2. The dallala is the marriage-broker whose task it is to exag- 
gerate the beauty of the girl to the hoped-for husband; but spring 
is so beautiful that its beauty exceeds all that the broker could 
invent. GB does not appear to grasp the meaning ; HB is better, 
albeit more pedestrian: 

“Drink wine! our blooming bride, the meadow, shines forth in 
beauty’s height; 

No need of the Dallalah’s practice while days like these delight.” 

3. GB: “The parrots of India are the court poets of Ghiya- 
suddin, and the Persian sweetmeat is the ode that Hafiz sent to 
Bengal.” 

4. For P reads The poem was presumably 

written in one night. 

5. For P reads jaT After this line B +RS 

add: 

■ijjLsf <^lj ( 3 > jl cSjj 1*^31 y .3 

160 



NOTES 


6. After this line B +RS add: 

(Sj^ J jJ ^ 

•^jj -OLj^ J^ -i 

8 . The commentators identify this Ghiyath al-Din alternatively 
as the king of Bengal (acc. 769/1367), and the Prince of Herat 
Ghiyath al-Din Pir ‘All (ruled 772-92/1370-89). The name does 
not occur elsewhere in the Divan. 

GB translates i2345*6§7 8. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

22 

MQ 219, B 121, RS 7, P 203. 

u tj 

Metre : ^y-pju o | — | | v^v_y — . 

Order of lines :B-}-RS 123485679* §. P12345678 

9 §- 

3. For jjj B -f-RS 4-P read 

4. For B -I- RS -f P read , which is rather a frigid 
metaphor: “clusters of sweet herbs, radiant as the zodiacal man- 
sions of the sun” (HB). 

5. The breath of Jesus in Muslim legend has power to raise 
the dead, cf. 15^. ‘Ud and Thamud are named in the Qur’an as 
unbelieving peoples who rejected the messengers sent to them 
by God and were in consequence utterly destroyed; see Qur’an, 
Sura VII, 65-79; XXVI, 123-59; xli, 14-17. 

6. Cf. 3^; the wine of unreason is the only consolation for the 
tragedy of evanescent beauty. 

7. A splendid conceit; for Solomon riding the wind see note 
on 87 . 

8. The “faith of old Zoroaster” is of course intended here as 
the Magian wine-bibbing : a magnificent heresy for a Muslim to 
propound I For the story of Nimrod : “ Nimrod, the king of the 

161 


AH 


H 



NOTES 


day, caused Abraham to be cast into a great fire, which was 
miraculously turned into a rose garden. Hence the fire of Nimrod 
which enflames the tulip.” (WL, p. 71.) The legend is related 
in comment upon Qur’an, Sura xxxvii, 97. 

9. For Asaf see note on 8^. Tmad al-Din Mahmud was a 
minister of Shah Shaikh Abu Ishaq (reigned 742-57/1341-56), 
one of Hafiz’ patrons. 

10. Tarbijat is the technical word for the protection afforded 
by a royal patron to a young poet, see Nizami ‘Arudi, Chahdr 

maqdluy p. 30^^: Ij ^ LI j 

OjTjIjjJj jI jj b For this line B-fRS substitute 

the following : 

fj (3^ b b b Jsd Lfc kXj I j* 

In P the following is given (in B + RS additional to the preceding, 
B placing it in parentheses) : 

j J 25 L. 6^b jL 

J ci^j j 

[The second hemistich in B + RS reads j j U 4 

^ yi Jjt> I yL ,j 

WL translates 14238679*. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 


23 

MQ 234, B 196, RS 82, P 212. 

w w 

Metre : |IL/ ^y^ w — w — | | — — | v-/v^ . 

Order of lines :B4-RS 1243657. P1234657. 

I . For iJ RS reads (Jj-i (a misprint). For the simile, see 383. 
3. For colS^ B 4-RS read c^iS^. 


162 



NOTES 


4. For ^ B 4- RS read c^l . HB is more faithful : 

From Heaven’s inverted tray, O heart ! expect not to obtain. 
Save by reproach and hundred pangs, one particle of gain.” 

5 . For P reads dj , For CrX B + RS + P read 6^^ ^ • 
For cf. 15^. Personal suffering and divine grace are both 
required for spiritual attainment. 

6. For see note on 5^ 

7. For B +RS read ^Jk) , P reads . Cf. 32I For 

(a repeated rhyme, see verse i) B -h RS 4- P read *0 Ij , which is 
surely superior, cf. 24^. 

JN translates 1236547. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

24 

MQ 233, B 249, RS 135, P 202. 

Metre : ^ — | — — . 

Order of lines: B4-RSi*452§:j:3||6. Pi2345:j:6. 

1. This is one of Hafiz’ finest and most interpolated lyrics. 
After this line B 4- RS add : 

•VjT Cf J ok* b* j b* 

The immediate repetition of the rhyme suggests that this line is 
merely a copyist’s quotation. 

2. Smoke is a common metaphor in Persian poetry for a 
burning sigh. After this line B 4- RS add : 

j bj 

Jo I y Ojij b jA Ja 1 j ii 

jj (Sy y^ 

P adds the second of these lines after verse 5 . 

163 


11-2 



NOTES 


3. For B + RS read jj . 

After this line B + RS add: 

I ^ -11- -** C ^ ■" *' 

•X) I ^ L X<w« 4«^C4>U ci*^ ^ 


which is extremely frigid. 

5. Note the contrast between jU and ; the beloved will 
not satisfy the material needs of the poor, much less the spiritual 
aspirations of the lover. 

GB translates i*452§:|;3 ||6. 

Other verse-translations by JP, RG. 


25 

MQ 254, B 292, RS II, P 255. 

V* 

Metre : j cJ ^ ^ 

v^j— w— -v^jv^ — w|— v^ — , 

Order of lines :B+RS 123564 7. Pas MQ. 

2. For B-fRS read . RS does not take this verse 
as part of the nightingale’s lament; HB follows him in this. 

3. The poem is evidently addressed to an absent friend, cf. 
verse 7. 

5 " J 6 " 0 J 

5. A reminiscence of Qur’an, Sura lv, 72: J olj^va^ 

- 0 ^ 

j j-ft ^ -* j 

6. I jA is a common Qur’anic phrase, see Sura x, 107; 
XII, 99; XXVIII, 15; XXXIX, 54; XLII, 3; XLVI, j; LXXXV, 14. 

AJA translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, GB. 


164 



NOTES 


26 

MQ 270, B 313, RS 4, P 279. 

Metre : jj-,a2v — |v>y — w— |v^v^ — . 

Order of lines unvaried. 

3. See 25 and note. 

7. It would appear from the form of the signature that this 
poem, like some others, was written by Hafi^ for singing by a 
famous minstrel; hence the poet’s reference to himself in the third 
person. The lyric clearly belongs to the poet’s early life, and is 
perhaps the simplest in the Dtvdn, 

IIH translates 123547. 

Other verse-translations by JP, Derozio (in Calcutta Keview for 
September 2, 1827). 


27 

MQ 279, B 322, RS 7, P 291. 

Metre: ^ I ^ I ^ — * 

Order of lines :B-f-RS 123456879. Pas MQ. 

2. For Ruknabad and Musalla see 3^, 139. ajjl “beware, 

God forbid” is an abbreviation of the Arabic ‘Ull “may 

God not desolate”. For Khidr, see note on i 87 . 

3. JaTarabad has now completely disappeared; see GB, p. 167, 
HB, p. 177. 

4. For (Sjf, B+RS read . For see Qur’an, 

Sura II, 81, 254; V, 109; XVI, 104; and see GB, p. 167; cf. 159. 

5. Egyptian sugar was (as it still is) famous for sweetness; so 
Hafiz says elsewhere: 

oLj jl Xj 

For the “ sweetmakers ” of Shiraz, cf. 3^. 

165 



NOTES 


6. For lull see note on 33. This poem and 3 are clearly closely 
related. 

RG translates 12345687. 

Other verse-translations by JP, GB, HB. 

28 

MQ 284, B 333, RS 18, P 296. 

Metre : iS |— w — . 

Order of lines :B 4- RS 125346789. P123546789. 

2. For L-ik) B + RS read j-ic- . For ^ cf. 6^. 

3. “raw” is a metaphor for “inexperienced”, and is con- 
trasted with “cooked”, “experienced”; in this case the 
“cooking” is to take place with the “fire” of the wine. Else- 
where Hafiz says : 

5. For B-fRS read JjS". WL has misunderstood the 
second hemistich; RS is better: 

“ Grosser ist die Gnade Gottes 
Als die Fulle uns’rer Schuld; 

Schweige! Kennst du den die Griinde, 

Die verborgenen, der Huld?” 

8. For Shah Shuja‘ see note on ii 5 . The three-line close is 
unusual, but explained by the panegyrical tone of the poem. 

WL translates 125 3467. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 

29 

MQ 295, B 348, RS I, P 303. 

Metre : O w — v^ — — |w — v-y-- — . 

Order of lines :Pi23546 7. B-fRS as MQ. 

I. For the conventional scene, cf. 44^"^. 



NOTES 


2. For 0^1^ B + RS read For B+RS+P read 

3. Cf. 25^. EHP mistranslates. 

5. For o^\jS P reads For B+RS read 

^UjI; but Is said to be a Turki word meaning 

“fault-finder, critic”, see Mirza Muhammad, TaWikh-i-Jahdn- 
gushd (vol. Ill, London 1937), pp. 298-9. 

6. For ^ B + RS read ^ (twice). 

3 - ■'b’O 5 3 a >0 

7. A reference to Qur’an, Sura v, 99 I 'ii I L . 
EHP translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB (two verses only). 

30 

MQ 300, B 355, RS 2, P 309. 

Metre : jj-yoX^ O w — w — | — | — — | v>»w — , 

Order of lines :Pi245 36789. B+RS as MQ. 

2. The first hemistich is a tadmtn from Zahir Faryabi (d. 
598/1201-2): 

1 JJUj ^ ^ ^ 3 dJjj jj ^ 

For ^ B + RS read jAj Xp . 

3. For B + RS + P read Oojj . 

5. For (S^.^ P reads (twice). 

6. For oV P reads ot^ . 

7. ±Sl^ literally “saddle-strap” by which game was secured. 

8. For B+RS read . 

AJA translates 123456789. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 



NOTES 


31 

MQ 309, B 412, RS 47, R 319. 

ul 

Metre : — |— vj — |— — . 
Order of lines unvaried. 

2. For B + RS read . . .0^^. 

4. For B +RS read . 

6. For jy ^ B has , RS has ^ J J (then 

j j I 

8. For cf. 2oh Hajji Qiwam al-Din, minister of 

Sultan Uwais of Baghdad (reigned 756-76/1355-74), is said to 
have founded a college for Hafiz in Shiraz; the poet praises him 
elsewhere. So GB, p. 154; but MQ identifies with Qiwam al-Din 
Hasan, minister of Abu Ishaq Inju, see p. 162 above; and K, 
Siissheim {Encyclopaedia of Islam y vol. ir, p. 211) with Qiwam 
al-Din Muhammad, minister of Shah Shuja‘. 

9. For o B + RS read . For B + RS read CjjLs. . 
JN translates 123456789, 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

32 

MQ 336, B 439, RS 74, P 380. 

Metre : (J-^J |ww — . 

Order of lines :B+RS 123465. Pas MQ. 

1. This famous poem is inscribed on Hafiz’ tomb. €£46^^“^. 

2. y (S^y. “by thy love I swear”. 

3. For,>^ B reads (misprint). 

5 . B -f RS end the poem with half this line and half of 1 . 7 : 

lT r * I _5 

y J J y^ 

168 



NOTES 


6. For the idea, cf. 2o7. 

7. B 4-RS omit the first hemistich, and the second hemistich 
of 1. 5 ; the repetition of the phrase j jU ^ suggests a 
doublet, and the rhyme is already used in 1 . i. Perhaps we 
should emend: 

j*j^ oUlsj J b* 

The “ shaking of the sleeves ’’ is often mentioned as a gesture of 
world-forsaking in the Sufi dance, and the phrase here balances 
well the idea The poem seems to have been written 

for recitation at the Sufi dhikr; for Hafiz in the third person, see 
note on 267. 

GB translates 123465. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 


33 


MQ 357, B 392, RS 27, P 385. 

, Ui 

Metre : O — | — | — | — . 

Order of lines :B+RSi*§26:j:345 7. Pas MQ. 


I. This remarkable poem is considerably interpolated. For 
j (Sjj^ B 4- RS read Ip j . The tavern is the darkness 

in which the Divine light rises, cf. 257. After this verse B 4-RS 
add: 




2. For the immediate repetition of the rhyme (lAsi. • . .^,iy 1 -^ 
cf. 30*“^; 40^"^. The poet Sana’i seems to have been * 
particularly partial to this device. The “king of pilgrims” is the 


169 



NOTES 


commander of the annual pilgrim train to Mecca. The “ house of 
God” is the ‘‘ancient house” at Mecca, the Ka‘ba. 

3. Cf. Cathay was the famous country for musk, won from 
the pod of the musk-deer. The poet puns here : ^ Iki can also 
mean “I see the error”, i.e. of supposing that I can attain the 
musk-strewing locks of the beloved. 

4. B -I- RS read d Ij . 

6. After this line B -f RS add: 

{j^. J ^ aJiil jo^ I ^ j ^ 

(ji iy \ ^ 

[RS omits by error.] 

AJA translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 


54 

MQ 372, B 367, RS 2, P 329. 

Metre : jj-ya^ ^ ^ 

v-/|— W — w— •, 

Order of lines :B4-RS 1234567*8. P13245768. 

1 . For ^ bi j B + RS read ^ Uo . 

2. Cf 75 and note. 

4. is a shortened form of . The translator has omitted 
the conceit of the red onyx. 

6. B + RS read The Mevlevi (whirling) der- 

vishes raise their arms during their gyrations. The poet puns here 
on the double meaning of 6-^jjT y which also signifies 

“to supplicate”, i.e. for a draught of wine. 

7. For j B-i-RS+P read . After this line B -f RS add: 

Jj Jjl2^ 6^j 

170 



NOTES 


8. Since we may never attain union with the Divine beloved, 
let us be content with the dust of His threshold. 

AJA translates 12345678. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 


35 

MQ 576, B 395, RS 28, P 544. 

ul 

Metre : j ow | | | — . 

Order of hnes: B + RS as MQ. P i 2 3 5 4 6 7. 

1. For j lT I B + RS +P read . 

2. Cf. i 4 . 

4. JN has misunderstood; HB is less elegant but more 
accurate: 

“ Heaven’s organist, that robber, superior men waylays : 

At this how check my sorrow, nor clamorous tumult raise 

5. JN is again inaccurate; HB again pedestrian but correct: 

“No wine we poured to water the rose’s boiling glow; 

And so we boil from yearning in flames of hopeless woe.” 

He glosses: “When the summer came we drank no wine.” 

6. JN omits; HB is incorrect: 

“ A fiery dew ideal from tulips’ cups we drain : 

Hence evil eye! this rapture from wine nor song we gain.” 

But wine and music make up Hafiz’ specific for rapture, cf. 3^, 
13^°, 22*; and it is the lack of them (cf. Unes 2, 5) that has made 
the poet distraught: the “imaginary” wine of the tulip’s cup is 
better than none at all. 



NOTES 


7. The poet says the very opposite of what JN translates; 
so RS: 

“ Wem, Hafis, kann man das Wunder 
Jemals mitzutheilen wagen, 

Dass wir Sprosser sei’n und schweigen 
In der Rose Wonnetagen?’’ 

JN translates 123457. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

36 

MQ 587, B 457, RS 15, P 407. 

Metre : O | — . 

Order of lines :B+RS 123456897. P123457689. 

2. For B + RS read 

4. The comparison of the mystic with a mote dancing in the 
sunbeam is common in Persian poetry; the appropriateness of the 
image ollj to the whirling Mevlevi dance is obvious. 

5. Forjj B reads (misprint). 

6. For B +RS read U. Note the pun — 6^^ . 

7. For Jj B + RS read j . Ahriman was the spirit of evil and 
darkness in the Zoroastrian religion; his name is then extended 
to signify “seducer”, “devil”. The poet gives a remarkable 
picture of the conflict between profane and sacred love. 

8. For 1 B -f-RS read Lyaj . ‘Umar Khaiyam has a varia- 
tion (how less perfect I) of this theme : 

y, y, 

FitzGerald: 

“I sometimes think that never blows so red 
The Rose as where some buried Caesar bled; 

That every Hyacinth the Garden wears 
Dropt in her Lap from some once lovely Head.” 


172 



NOTES 


9. For 6^-^ B +RS read 

AJA translates 123456789. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 

37 

MQ 392, B 453, RS II, P 392. 

Metre: Cx^ 

o|— w — w|— — . 

Order of lines unvaried. 

1. For (Sj ^ MQ reads ^S^ (misprint). 

2. For P reads . 

5. An elegant play on words that defies adequate translation. 

6. See 84 and note. 

7. For B 4- RS + P read . Shah Mansur is identical 
with Shuja* al-Din, son of Sharaf al-Din Muzaffar, son of Mubariz 
al-Din Muhammad, and was a nephew of Shah Shuja' (for whom 
see note on ii 5 ); after a troubled reign he was put to death by 
Timur in 795/1393. Shah Yahya (Nusrat al-Din) his brother had 
an equally turbulent career. Both rulers are mentioned several 
times by Hafiz. For the history of the ill-fated Muzaffarid house, 
see Encjclopaedia of Islam, vol. iii, pp. 798-9. 

WL translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB, RG. 


58 

MQ 396, B 459, RS 17, P 405. 

Metre: 

KJ [— W — Vw/jw wj— W — . 

Order of lines : P i 2 5 * 4 6. B 4- RS as MQ. 


173 



NOTES 


I. This poem is in the same metre and rhyme as another by 
Hafiz (MQ 395) beginning: 

J lA^ ^ L^- 

4. For the conceit, cf. 13^ and note; Hafiz says elsewhere: 

Jl^l iilb^ cjT jj J 

^ I I JLI L>> ^JAM ^ ^>^0 Ij 

5. After this line P adds (taking the verse out of MQ 395): 

iS3y. 

(j 5 ^ IjajliiL lt j 

6. For B + RS read cSij . 

AJA translates 123456. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 

39 

MQ 407, B 477, RS 10, P 413. 

, w 

Metre : oj^ O yy Cf>^ cAj — | — . 

Order of lines :B-hRS 1234756 8. P12734568. 

1 . A splendid meditation on a vision of the crescent moon. 

2. For cS-XjjXiisi B + RS read . RG’s version of this 

poem is rather free ; for a closer translation, though less poetical, 
see HB. 

3. Sc. if you cut all material ties; cf. 6^. P reads j cSJj 
(misprint). 

4. For :»j ^ P reads . 

6. For B reads (misprint). 

8. For Jaj B 4-RS read (jjj , The woollen robe is the mark 
of the Sufi; cf. 42^. 

RG translates 127465. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 


174 



NOTES 


40 

MQ 417, B 489, RS II, P 428. 

Metre : — I ^ — I (^) — | '^ — • 

Order of lines: B+RSi23456*§:j:||7. Pas MQ. 

1 . Hafiz has another poem in the same rare metre and rhyme : 

Aj] jiCi-l oh* jT ^ ^ 

Note the play on the two meanings of mudam, 

2 . See note on 3 3 ^ ; for the internal rhyming (rather uncommon 
in Hafiz) cf. 3^*9. 

3 . For B + RS read . 

4. For B + RS H- P read J y . 

6. After this line B + RS add : 

d 1 ^ I 6 i!>» I ^ 1 tXoLM Lo ^ li£' ^ I 

IW w 

-9 jUj 

oULa u^-jy, 

oLSjJi iJLd. Jl y^ c-wy.A-=L olj jl ^ 

7. B + RS reverse ^rj and j . 

AJA translates 1234567. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 

41 

MQ 428, B 487, RS 9, P 432. 

* w 

Metre : w |w 1 ^^ — . 

Order of lines: B 4-RS i 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 7 10. P as MQ. 

2. For j B + RS read . A splendid 

epitome of the poet’s philosophy of unreason! 


175 



NOTES 


3. For djJLfr P reads RG has misunderstood this and 

the following line; RS is better: 

“Der schone Weinverkaufer sah 
Mich dann gar freundlich an, 

So dass ich, vor des SchicksaPs List 
Nun sicher, leben kann. 

Vom Schenken mit den Bogenbrau’n 
Vernahm, was folgt, mein Ohr: 

‘ O du, den sich des Tadels Pfeil 
Zum Ziele auserkohr!’” 

6. Cf. The Anca is a fabulous bird, hence its nesting- 

place is unattainable. 

7. For B reads For B reads P reads 

. The literal meaning is, “ What man profits of union with 

that royal beauty who is ever playing at self-love?” This and the 
lines following contain the essence of the Sufi doctrine of Divine 
love : God created the world to be an image of Himself ; how can 
the image aspire to the love of its Creator? All things, in so far 
as they have any meaning at all, are reflections of the Divine 
beauty, and do not exist apart from God. This then is the riddle 
of life : that we are by our very being impelled to seek the love 
of Him who is utterly self-sufficient and has no need of us or our 
love. 

9. For B-fRS read For this and the following 

line, cf. 3^ and note. 

RG translates 123456897 10. 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB (four verses). 

42 

MQ 447, B 518, RS 24, P 470. 

Metre : w |w | — . 

Order of lines :B-hRS 126345 7. Pas MQ. 

176 



NOTES 


1. cf. 477-1 

2. Presumably the nasi hat is the poet’s customary warning that 
material beauty is transient, the only course is to drink the wine 
of unreason; cf. 37-^. 

4. For B + RS read , The sentiment is similar to that 
expressed by Hafiz elsewhere: 

l y? 9 ^ Ij b) L$__^ J ^ 

7. The poet, as his name indicates, knew the Qur’an by heart 
(hafiz): in a double sense therefore he had the Scriptures in his 
breast ! 

AJA translates 1234567. 

Another verse- translation by JP. 

43 

MQ 452, B 503, RS 9, P 492. 

Metre : O — | kj — — |ww — . 

Order of lines :B+RS 1234*55. Pas MQ. 

I., An excellent meditation on the true and false Sufi. 

2. The word properly signifies “noble veiled woman”, 
and is then applied by extension to anything noble and precious. 
The poet is of course being sarcastic: noble reason — the religion 
of self-love and pride — has nothing to do with his philosophy of 
unreasoning love. 

3 . What better text than this to explain Hafiz’ use of the terms 
“wine” and “drunkenness” to mean the denial of reason and 
the annihilation of self? 

4. For B -f RS 4- P read o\ ^ , After this line B 4- RS add : 

c-jIxsI ^ 

Two singularly inept verses ! 

WL translates 123545. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 

AH 177 


12 



NOTES 


44 

MQ 465, B 528, RS 34, P 490. 

Metre: 

v^|— w — w| ^ w|— v^--. 

Order of lines :Pi25346 7. B + RS as P. 

1. RS reads ^ Ij . 

2. J-iU- as well as meaning “clamour” also signifies the sound 
made by a liquid being poured out of a long-necked flagon. 

3. B-fRSread 

4. For B -f- RS read j . For the second hemistich 

B 4-RS read b^..^ • 

7. For ^ B + RS + P read ^ . For J 1 B -i- RS read lT j . For 
B + RS read O 
AJA translates 1234567. 

Other verse-translations by JP, GB, HB. 

45 

MQ 476, B 566, RS 72, P 445. 

^ ul M 

Metre : oj-Xsi o — jww | w— -w — •. 

Order of lines : B -f RS 1234657. Pas MQ. 

2. For b ® read Ij . RS translates : “ Mein Aug’ 
ruht auf der Strasse Rand ”. The phrase is omitted by RG. 

5. For B-f-RS read For B-hRS+Pread 

c-j ly ; MQ defends the reading yo \y by referring the enclitic 
pronoun to . For B -f-RS read . 

6. For B + RS read and so RG translates. 

7. For B-4-RS read Perhaps we are to conclude 

from this last line that the poem was addressed to an Arab friend, 
Hafiz intending a pun on the double meaning of Turkl. 

RG translates 1236547. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 



NOTES 


46 

MQ p. 356, B 686, RS 2 (p. 464), F ii, P 863. 

. Ul 

Metre : Vj ^ l'^ — l'^~* 

Order of lines highly irregular. 

1 . This fine poem in mathnawi verse has suffered from wholesale 
interpolations. I have followed the text established by F which 
restores perfect symmetry to an otherwise shapeless agglomera- 
tion and disembarrasses the poet of many weak lines. 

2. ‘‘Both parts”, i.e. grace and perfection. 

3. See notes on ii^, 12^, 15 ' 5 . For L MQ + P read oJb . 

4. For j*Uj‘ B 4 - RS read 

5. The original has “the treasure of Qarun” (i.e. Korah). For 
the story of Korah, Moses’ wealthy kinsman, his oppression and 
his overthrow, see Qur’an, Sura xxviii, 76-82. 

7. With this catalogue of the ancient kings of Persia cf. 134. 

9. The Persian poets often compare the world with an ancient 
convent, in which men lodge for their little time. 

10. This and the following three lines are not in B -f RS. 

12. For MQ + P read cSlj . Shi da was the son of 
Afrasiyab. 

13. For ,^^|$"MQ + P read For ^ MQ reads 

, P reads ^ 

14. The “virgin chastely veiled” is the wine, often so called 
by the Persian poets. 

17. For X B + RS+MQ + P read x. The word 
^ has the double meaning (both intended here) of “lion- 
taming” and “tipsy”. The “old wolf” is, as often in Persian 
poetry, the world, cunning and full of treachery. 

0 ' _ ^ 

18. MQ reads ^ P jT 

i9» For MQ 4- P read . For MQ 4- P read oJb . 

179 


12-2 



NOTES 


20. For B + RS + MQ + P read 6 ^ ^ . For j I 

MQ +P read J (5^, B 4-RS read ijUjA 0^53 jl 
23. For the ruin and the treasure, see 9^ and note. 

25. For (J^)h jl MQ reads (breaking the 

rhyme), P , B + RS JUj b j . For (SJj^ B + RS + 

MQ 4- P read (Jj . 

26. For oybj :>jj MQ + P read jljT dytj . Cf. : 

Ij 1 J t ^..^£ 4j ^ Lft»tuT j ^ 

Other verse-translations by JP, HB. 


47 

MQ p. 354, B 685, RS I (p. 454), F 8, P 861. 

Metre : cJj-^ w |w |v^ — . 

Order of lines irregular. 

1 . I have adopted the edition of F which largely reconstructs 
the poem. For j MQ + P read . 

2. For MQ 4 -P read J LgJb* . For B + RS + MQ -f P 

rc2Ld . For J c\j B reads j RS j j :>^5 

MQ+P cx. 1 ^ J 

3. P reads 4 here and then 3. 

4. For ^ P reads . For P reads . For I 
B + RS + MQ + P read j* ^ . 

5. For 6b-^ B +RS +MQ +P read ol 2 Jj . 

6. For JjT ^ oj o; I MQ + P read -b UlT <5; IS^, B + RS ^ 

For Khidr see note on i 87 . 

7. B + RS+MQ+P here run on to the section 11-15; this 
line is 1 . 20 in ,B + RS + MQ, 1 . 19 in P. 

8. This line is 1 . 15 in B+RS, 1 . 19 in MQ, 1 . 18 in P. For 
|,r^j B + RS + MQ+P read ^ . 

180 



NOTES 


9. This line is 1 . 14 in B + RS, 1 . 30 in P; it is not given in MQ. 

10. This line is 1 . 22 in B + RS, 1 . 21 in MQ, 1 . 20 in P. 


1 1 . This line and the four following are 11 . 7-1 1 in B + RS + P, 
11 . 7, 9-12 in MQ. For Ikt MQ + P read lij. The poet quotes 
Qur’an, Sura 21^9 (Zachariah crying to God for a child to succeed 
him). After this line MQ adds : 


L) L) I ^ ^ ii i J ^1 " 11-^ 


But this is a very feeble verse. 


12. For MQ reads cS-Xij . 

14. For j MQ+P read For the significance of the 
simurgh, see note on 41^. 

16. This line is 1 . 16 in MQ+P + B-fRS. For JU B+RS 
read j ^ . For U B 4- RS 4- MQ 4- P read . 

17. This line is 1 . 13 in B4-RS4-MQ, 1 . 12 in P. For 
MQ 4-P read jljj . For JIj j B 4*RS read j , MQ 

P j i 3 lj* j . If JL is correct, it must signify “top”. 

18. This line is 1 . 15 in MQ, 1 . 14 in P, 1 . 17 in B 4-RS. B4-RS 
read <J^ dL j -wU. ^ . B 4- RS 4- MQ read j cJif. 

19. This line is 1 . 17 in MQ4-P, 1 . 18 in B4-RS. 

20. This line is 1 . 19 in MQ4*B4-RS, 1 . 15 in P. For oJbJ 
MQ 4- P read o . 

21. This line is 1 . 14 in MQ, 1 . 13 in P, 1 . 12 in B 4-RS. For 
Jo MQ 4- P read . 

22. This line is 1 . 28 in MQ, 1 . 27 in P, 1 . 32 in B 4-RS. For 
MQ4-P read 

23. This line is 1 . 29 in MQ, 1 . 28 in P, 1 . 33 in B4-RS. For 

jljJl MQ 4-P read j 1^1 

24. This line and the four following are ll. 23-7 in MQ, ll. 22-6 
in P, ll. 31, 34-7 in B4-RS. For jiJS B4-RS4-MQ4-P read 

. The poet refers to Qur’an, Sura lxviii, i and puns on the 



NOTES 


word niin which the commentators interpret as “fish”; he implies 
that his poetry is as divinely inspired as the Qur’an, cf. 6”. 

25. B + RS read . For B + RS read cJ:S , 

26. For MQ reads j B + RS +P 

read • For B -j* RS read 3 • 

27. ForJj L P reads jjlo. 

28. For 0:^ P reads (misprint). For jTj MQ +P read 
61 ^ . For ^1 P reads • See 33^ and note: the poet repeats 
his claim that his poetry has a celestial origin. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 

48 

F 10. 

Metre : — |'^ — 1 ^“* 

1 . F has reconstructed this poem out of lines excluded by him 
from the Sdqi-ndma (46); these lines are found in other editions 
of that composition (MQ, P). 

2. For |*j MQ -f P read . 

3. For J’j MQ reads . For -Uj P reads AJJ . 

4. The idea is evidently proverbial. Cf. Fakhr al-Din Gurgani, 
Vis u KdmJn (ed. Minovi), p. 440 : 

Ij jjj I ^ ^ ^ ^ 

For other parallels, see ‘Ali Akbar Dihkhuda, Amthdl u hikam^ 
pp. 947-8. 

5 . For y- L MQ -1- P read y* L j . 


49 

MQ p. 367, B 268, RS 154, P 680. 

u) 

Metre : J-»j - w — |-w — |-w — 
Order of lines unvaried. 


182 



NOTES 


I. The older editors (B + RS) printed this poem among the 
ghazals, but modern Persian editors place it among the muqatta^dt. 
For B + RS read . 

3. For Jui j B + RS + P read . 

5. B +RS read ^ 3 jy 3 3 ^ • Cf. 31^^ 

for the description. 

Other verse-translations by JP, RG. 

50 

MQ p. 369, B 604, RS 31, P 692. 

Metre : O J-t) . 

Order of lines unvaried. 

1. B + RS read jUaLv 

2. For j cJ^B + RS read Jjj ‘Uvj Jl jolS"=20 + 
1=21. For jJai B+RS read ^3 . 

3. For jl B + RS read c^j. The phrase is a chrono- 

gram; the numerical value of the constituent letters is 

200 + 8+ 40 +400 + 8 + 100 = 756. 

Another verse-translation by JP. 


183 




LIST OF TRANSLATORS 


Arberry, Arthur John, i, 6, 15, 20, 25, 30, 33, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48 

Bell, Gertrude, 8, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 32 

Bicknell, Hermann, 14 

Bridges (Daryush), Elizabeth, 2 

H. H., 26 

Hindley, John Haddon, 10 
Jones, Sir William, 3 
Law, Thomas, 9 

Leaf, Walter, 7, 22, 28, 37, 43, 49 

Le Gallienne, Richard, 27, 39, 41, 45, 50 

Levy, Reuben, 1 1 

Nott, John, 4, 23, 31, 33 

Palmer, Edward Henry, 29 

Payne, John, 16 

Richardson, John, 5 


185 



INDEX OF FIRST LINES 


Again the times are out of joint; and again page 1 54 

Ah, when shall I to thy mouth and lips attain 103 

All my pleasure is to sip 124 

Breeze of the morning, at the hour thou knowest 128 

Come, let us pass this pathway o’er 1 18 

Come, saki, come, your wine ecstatic bring 129 

Come, vex me not with this eternal spite 1 26 

Cypress and Tulip and sweet Eglantine 104 

Give, O Give love’s sportful joys 114 

Go, friendly Zephyr I whisp’ring greet 86 

High-nesting in the stately hr 108 

Ho, saki, haste, the beaker bring 83 

I cease not from desire till my desire 107 

I walked within a garden fair 127 

In the green sky I saw the new moon reaping 123 

Ismail is dead, of men and cadis best 135 

Last night I dreamed that angels stood without 102 

Long years my heart had made request 97 

Man of self, lifted up with endless pride 1 26 

Monarch of firs that stately rise 1 20 

My bosom grac’d with each gay flow’r 92 

Not all the sum of earthly happiness 100 

O love, how have I felt thy pain 109 

Rang through the dim tavern a voice yesterday 1 1 1 

Returns again to the pleasaunce the rose, alive from the dead 105 

Saki, the dawn is breaking 122 

Say, where is rapture’s vision? Eyes on the Loved One bending 121 

Send the criers round the market, call the roys’ters’ band to hear 135 

Shiraz, city of the heart no 

Slaves of thy shining eyes arc even those 101 

Sweet maid, if thou would’st charm my sight 85 

That day of friendship when wc met 97 

The house of hope is built on sand 89 

The rose has flushed red, the bud has burst 91 

The season comes, that breathes of joy 1 19 

The secret draught of wine and love repressed 95 

Thus spoke at dawn the field-bird to the newly wakened rose 94 

’Twas morning, and the Lord of day 1 12 

What though a thousand enemies propose 1 1 3 

When from the goblet’s eastern brim shall rise 106 

When my Beloved the cup in hand taketh 100 

186 



INDEX OF FIRST LINES 

Where are the tidings of union? that I may arise page 1 16 

Where is the pious doer? and I the estrayM one, where? 84 

Whither fled, wild deer? 1 3 1 

Wild of mien, chanting a love-song, cup in hand, locks disarrayed 90 

Wind from the east, oh Lapwing of the day 94 

With last night’s wine still singing in my head 1 25 

With sullen pace stern winter leaves the plain 87 

Within the Magian tavern 1 1 7 

Zephyr, should *st thou chance to rove 93 


187 
